e4b1a7f03bbf39c2e88fffad78e8ae2e446400ab
EXTERNAL SCIENTIFIC REPORT Review of immune stimulator substances/agents that are susceptible of being used as feed additives: mode of action and identification of end-points for efficacy assessment Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries (IRTA) Joaquim Brufau -Project manager Enric Esteve -Expert panel coordinator Joan Tarradas -Developer



Additives may exert a beneficial effect on the immune system and could thus improve the welfare of animals. In most cases, the mode of action of these additives is unknown, which makes assessment of their efficacy difficult. The project OC/EFSA/FEED/2014/01 aims to identify substances/agents used as feed additives aiming to exert a beneficial effect on the immune system of animals. This project considered 1144 scientific articles, which provided data for around 185 substances/agents with the potential to be used as immune feed additives. Of the 185 substances/agents detected, 51 were probiotics, 25 were classified as prebiotics, 92 as plant extract, five as animal by-products, and 12 were included as 'other substances'. For each substance / agent, the prevalent mode of action for each animal species, interactions with other dietary compounds, relevant end-points that could demonstrate efficacy, methods for the objective measurement of end-points, risks for the safety of the target animals, consumer, users and the environment, existing legislation in third countries, and the patents published until the time of writing were identified. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  The scientific Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP) of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) assesses the safety and efficacy of feed additives. Regulation (EC) No 1831 (Regulation, 2003 establishes the rules for the authorisation of feed additives in the European Union (EU). Applicants wishing to place a feed additive in the EU market shall send an application to the European Commission (EC) and a technical dossier to EFSA. It is the task of EFSA to provide the ECwith a scientific opinion in which the assessment of the safety and the efficacy of the feed additive is reported. This task is entrusted to the FEEDAP Panel. The FEED Unit provides scientific and technical / administrative support to the Panel. Article 5(3) of the aforementioned Regulation provides the definition of efficacy of feed additives. In particular, it lays down that no feed additive shall be authorised unless it has been demonstrated that it satisfies one or more of the following conditions.  Favourably affect the characteristics of feed, animal products, and/or the colour of ornamental fish and birds;  Satisfy the nutritional needs of animals;  Favourably affects the environmental consequences of animal production;  Favourably affects animal production, performance or welfare, particularly by affecting the gastrointestinal flora or digestibility of feeding-stuffs;  Have a coccidiostatic or histomonostatic effect. Additives that may exert a beneficial effect on the immune system of animals would, in principle, fulfil the above mentioned criteria by improving the welfare of animals. In recent years, the number of applications for feed additives aiming to exert a beneficial effect on the immune system of animals, especially companion animals, has increased considerably. However, in most of the cases the mode of action of these additives is unknownwhich makes assessment of their efficacy difficult. In order to identify all substances/agents with the potential to be used as feed additives with a direct favourable effect on the immune system of animals, an extensive and systematic examination of publications and relevant patents has been undertaken. To retrieve optimal results, the literature search was conducted using four different databases (three bibliographies and one patent database):  Web of Science Core Collection (WoS) contains information gathered from thousands of scholarly journals in all disciplines and more than 250 fields of study, including agriculture, animal, biological, environmental and veterinary sciences.  MEDLINE provides authoritative medical information on medicine, veterinary medicine, the health care system, pre-clinical sciences, etc.  SciELO Citation Index has nearly 650 journals and over 4 million cited references centred in Latin America, Spain, Portugal, the Caribbean and South Africa.  Questel-Orbit© is the world's most comprehensive patent database. In order to conduct the searches in the three databases mentioned above (WoS, Medline, and SciELO), the website belonging to Web of Science was used (www.webofknowledge.com) . This allowed all searches to be saved, with outputs obtained and the date to guaranteeing traceability. The range of dates searched included 1 st January 1990 until 12 th November 2014 (with the exception of SciELO, for which the database has only been available since 1997). Search chains with specific key words were formulated in order to include as many studies as possible and avoid the exclusion of any agent/substance with immunomodulatory effects. Fifteen search chains were run in the three databases in order to maximize output. The search chains used are shown in Table 1. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 20 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  The selection process is divided into the following steps (see Figure 1 ): Results obtained with all searches were imported to an Endnote file (EndNote is a bibliographic software program for managing references). They were then organised by database and search chain. Duplicates were removed duringthis step. STEP 2: All full texts available to the institution were downloaded, and references without full text were removed from the project due the impossibility of analysing and characterising them. In order to manage all articles with full text, the tool Distiller SR© systematic review software was used. Results were imported to Distiller through the EndNote program. This software allows reference information to be shared by the whole review teams. Data fields within the reference records were used to retain decisions (e.g. about study inclusion or exclusion) or queries about the publication. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). STEP 4: Selection based on title and abstract. The first step, using software Distiller, was to include or exclude all references analysing title and abstract (level 1 and 2). Two members of the team independently checked the set of articles, and decided whether the initially selected articles should be included or excluded, by applying the inclusion/exclusion criterion of key elements on titles and abstracts. In this step, the inclusion criterion was that the study was related to the tender (feed additive with direct effect on immune system). Included articles, excluded articles, and articles classified as doubtful recorded in the data collection form. Included articles were incorporated directly into Level 3 of Distiller for their review. If a team member was not sure whether to include or exclude an article, Level 1 allowed classifying this work as a doubtful. The doubtful articles were included into level 2 of Distiller. These works were discussed in a meeting with the other team member, and a decision was taken. Level 2 had the same inclusion/exclusion criteria than Level 1 but only allowed to include or exclude the article of the review process. If screening through title and abstract was unclear, the full text was retrieved. previously selected on the basis of title and abstract screening (level 1 and 2) , were screened to be included or excluded based on the full text, attending the inclusion/exclusion criteria set up in the protocol. Inclusion criteria guarantee the quality of each study. Included and excluded articles were recorded in the data collection form. The studies excluded in this step were reported, explaining the reasons in detail. If required (for instance, disagreements between reviewers occur), independent reviewers helped to resolve differences in opinion. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 22 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The criteria used to include or exclude the articles in level 1 and 2 (Distiller SR) are described below (Table 2) : LEVEL 1 and 2 (Distiller SR)  Reference with full text (PDF) Reference without full text (PDF) Research article Non-research article Target species described in the tender specifications Target species not described in the tender specifications Feed additive with direct effect on immune system Feed additive without direct effect on immune system or not a feed additive The inclusion criteria established in the level 2 of Distiller were developed to guarantee the methodological quality of each article. The quality assessment checklist analyses aspects of the design, execution, analysis, and reporting of a study. These criteria established the standards and conditions that each study should meet in accordance with the aims and objectives of the project. The inclusion criteria depend of the type of experiments (in vivo, in vitro, or ex vivo) and are divided into three groups: i) Essential conditions: These must be met in full for each study. Failure to meet the criteria meant that the study was not included in the review. ii) Highly Desirable conditions: If two of more of these conditions were not met, the study was rejected. iii) Desirable: If three of more of these conditions were not met, the study was rejected. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 24 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Table 3 illustrates thequality assessment checklist used in this project. Documents that satisfied the quality assessment were then subject to the review process. The international expert advisory panel and all groups involved explorated how scientific analysis should be conducted. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The decisions taken are indicated in Figure 2 , which illustrates all the information in order to collate each research article selected in Level 1 of Distiller SR and comply with the appropriate quality assessment in Level 2 of Distiller. Table 4 describes the entire questionnaire relevant to the selected articles (Level 3 of Distiller SR). This questionnaire allows readers to obtain answers for all parameters described in Figure 2 . The Distiller SR software allows conduction of this survey and is able to store all relevant information. Using this programme, data is easily manipulated, allowing for the creation of a specific table of a selected parameter. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Substance/agent Probiotic The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Not specified  When the final list of products was obtained, a specific patent search for each product was conducted. In order to carry out this search, Questel-Orbit© software was used. This software allows a worldwide search of patents and classifies each patent by country. Questel-Orbit is the world's most comprehensive patent database, gathering more than 100 databases for specialists in patents and designs. FamPat, the main patent database, covers more than 95 offices, including China, India, and Japan; these are grouped by invention-based families and enriched with full-text databases. The searches were conducted into the "cooperative patent classification" (CPC) A23K(Fodder / Animal feeding-stuffs). The following chain search was used: (+IMMUN+)/TI/AB/IW/CLMS AND (NAME OF THE PRODUCT)/TI/AB/IW/CLMS) AND (A23K+)/IPC AND PD >= 1995-09-01. This chain of searches allows the identificationofall patents forthe given substance / agent, including the word "immune" (and all derivatives of this word) into the category A23K, from 1st of September of 1995 until the time of writing. The number of outputs obtained by the searches is summarised in Table 5 . The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). WoS  179  52  127  84  8  oral immune gut animal  WoS  272  132  140  116  9  immune gut feed  WoS  1229  408  821  618  10  immune intestinal feed  WoS  1750  978  772  589  11  immunity gut feed  WoS  574  381  193  156  12  immune intestinal food animal  WoS  288  189  99  65  13  immune additive animal  WoS  287  150  137  97  14  Prebiotic  WoS  1625  240  1385  989 15 probiotic* OR prebiotic* AND action AND immun* AND animal AND intestin* AND YEAR PUBLISHED 1990-2014 AND feed* NOT allerg* NOT human)) NOT cancer* The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). In order to manage all articles with full text, the tool Distiller SR© systematic review software was used. The 12723 references with PDF were imported to Distiller through the EndNote programme. STEP 1: Selection was based on title and abstract. The first step involved in using software Distiller was to include or exclude all references and analysing the title and abstract (levels 1 and 2). Two members of the team independently checked the set of articles in order to decide whether or not those initially selected should be included; they did so by applying the inclusion/exclusion criterion pertaining to the key elements of the titles and abstracts. At this stage, the inclusion criterion was whether or not the study was related to the tender (feed additive with a direct effect on the immune system). STEP 2: Selection based on full text (level 3). The relevant articles previously selected on the basis of their titles and abstracts (level 1 and 2) were screened in order to be included or excluded based on the full text, taking into account the inclusion/exclusion criteria agreed in the protocol. Inclusion criteria guaranteed the quality of each study, and the articles included after quality assessment were analysed in order to fill in the questionnaire described in the Table 3 . The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). General definition: Probiotics have been defined as mono-or mixed cultures of living microorganisms that beneficially affect the host by improving the properties of the indigenous microbiota' (Fuller, 1992) . The available probiotics can be classified into (1) 'colonising' species, such as Lactobacillus and Enterococcus spp., and (2) free flowing 'noncolonising' species, such as Bacillus spp. (spores) and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Huyghebaert, Ducatelle, & Van Immerseel, 2011) . Definition as pertaining to feed regulations: Probiotic is also defined as Direct Feed Microbial (DFMs). DFM is a microbial included in the group of feed additive for stabilising the microbial communities of the digestive tract in monogastrics and ruminants. Probiotics are generally considered to enhance the intestinal microbial balance. However, today there is another important benefit for the host,as there isgrowing evidence that probiotics can modulate the immune system. 3.3.1.2 List of substances / agents (Probiotics) The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). There were a total of 921 scientific papers assessing the benefits of probiotics on the immune system of animals (Table 6 ). This collection of papers represents more than 60% of documents accepted by the process of selection. The main groups of microorganisms explored in this search are Lactobacillus spp., Bacillus spp., Enterococcus spp., Saccharomyces spp., Bifidobacterium spp., Pediococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., Aspergillus spp., Clostridium spp., and Candida spp. 3.3.2.1 Definition of "Prebiotic" "Prebiotics are non digestible food or feed ingredient that beneficially affects the host by selectively stimulating the growth and / or activity of one or a limited number of bacteria in the colon, and thus improves host health" (Gibson & Roberfroid, 1995; Roberfroid, 2007 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). order for a dietary substrate to be classed as a prebiotic, at least three criteria are required: (1) the substrate must not be hydrolysed or absorbed in the stomach or small intestine, (2) it must be selective for beneficial commensal bacteria in the large intestine such as the bifidobacteria, (3) fermentation of the substrate should induce beneficial luminal / systemic effects within the host (Manning & Gibson, 2004) . The aforementioned definition might be considered restrictive in that it does not accept all of the compounds introduced in the list. We included compounds such as LPS as a prebiotic (LPS was included in this section, due to the fact that its application was not used as an antigen or a challenge) (see Table 7 ). The main groups of prebiotics studied in this search are Mannan oligosaccharides (MOS), Glucan, Fructoologosacharides (FOS), Yeast cell wall (YCW), Inulin and Chitoologosaccharides (COS). The main action of the prebiotic at the intestinal tract is to enhance animal health status, due to its unique properties. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Plant extracts or phytogenic feed additives comprise a large number of compounds or variety of herbs, spices, and products derived thereof; essentials oils are such products. A common feature of phytobiotics is that they are a highly complex blend of bioactive components; these products are also called "Plant Secondary Metabolites" (PSM) and represent a diverse group of natural products, some of which may have nutritive values but the majority of which do not and might even be considered antinutritional (Hashemi & Davoodi, 2011) . The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The bibliographic revision has detected 263 papers in which the application of plant extracts in animal feeding was assessed (  3.3.4.1 Definition of "Animal by-product" Animal by-products are entire bodies or parts of animals, products of animal origin, or other products obtained from animals; these are not intended for human consumption, and include oocytes, embryos, and semen. Feeding animals with these products may improve the animal's performance and/or may modulate their immune system. The bibliographic revision has detected 51 papers in which the application of animal byproduct in animal feeding was assessed (Table 9 ). The main compounds studied include: lactoferrin (LF), spray-dried products (SDP), and antibodies. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 41 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). This section includes a group of compounds also used as feed additives, such as technological, nutritional, or zootechnical feed additives. The section also includes substances present in natural products, such as algae or fungi mushroom. 3.3.5.2 List of substances / agents (Other substances) The bibliographic revision detected 287 papers in which the application of other substances / agents in animal feeding was assessed ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). This section describes the mode of action for major substances, by target species. We have considered the prevalent mode of action, and a summary of this mode of action is described in the list of articles included. The most common additives studied in swine, with regard to its effects on immunity, were probiotics. Among these (186 studies), most were regarded as Lactobacilli (69 studies), Bacillus (31 studies), Enterococcus (29 studies), and Saccharomyces (30 studies) (Table 11 ).  Refs :  9177  2496  1402  6395  5094  3751  12889  12893  4135  3509  1901  6149  3580  5185  3579  6718  1549  3428  12200  4401  4496  1874  5888  2333  4314  5743  12136  6978  4562 The function of Lactobacillus is to keep the gut micropopulation in a balanced state and to prevent the proliferation of pathogenic microorganisms (increasing lactic acid and total volatile fatty acids (VFA) concentrations). Lactobacillus enhanced the level of mucosal proteins involved in energy metabolism, cell structure, and mobility in the jejunum of weaning piglets. The higher VFA concentration in the colon of the lactic acid bacteria (LAB)-fed piglets might have contributed to the lower rates of diarrhoea. The higher concentrations of lactic and acetic acid in the ileum and colon of LAB-fed piglets could have been the result of the higher numbers of LAB in these animals, as LAB during fermentation may either produce lactic acid alone or may produce both lactic and acetic acid. The LAB numbers and their major fermentation products may indirectly affect the concentrations of acetic, propionic and butyric acid. Reduction of pathogenic microorganisms in the gut of animals can be explained by the fact that LAB reduces pH in the luminal contents, which can inhibit the proliferation of pathogenic bacteria. Villous heights (VH) of the small intestine were increased by administration of Lactobacillus. The reduced lymphocyte infiltration in the gastrointestinal tract in treated animals may indicate reduced inflammation. The duodenum colonisation with Lactobacillus can contribute to a variety of mucosal immune responses, including an increase in the expression of TLR2, TLR9, the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-1, and the secretion of cytokines; this also elevates the number of immunoglobulin (Ig)-A producing cells. Lactobacillus increases the amount of intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) and IgA-producing cells in the intestinal tract, resulting in the development of intestinal mucosal immunity, whereas the effect on the secretion of interleukin (IL)-6 may also provide beneficial assistance for the development of intestinal The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author (s).   10989  12122  3879  3937  8522  1916  11382  8281  6105  3510  7322  12762  11167  11055  12165  1674  10634  11708  6278  13004  5655  12723  1873  12899  6811  3581  1783  2001  5410  699  11429  5574  1785  1777  12076  11976  10477  12724  12164  2486 inflammatory activity through the modulation of A20 and B-cell lymphoma (Bcl)-3, but not of the Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase phosphatase 1 (MKP-1). Lactobacillus appears to have similar effects and strongly up-regulated A20, BCL-3. The toll interacting protein (Tollip), Single-immunoglobulin interleukin-1 receptor-related (SIGIRR), and MKP-1 levels in porcine intestinal epitheliocytes (PIE) cells also had similar effects. Levels of Bcl-3, SIGIRR, and Tollip were higher in PIE cells treated with the Lactobacillus strain, indicating that other pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) could be involved along side the TLR2 in the upregulation of these TLR negative regulators. Il-1β, Il-8, Il-17 and TNF-, pro-inflammatory cytokines were observed to have lower mRNA expression after Lactobacillus administration. The results indicate that the NOD-like receptor family, pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3), expression is upregulated by TLR2, TLR9, NOD1 and NOD2 agonists in adult and new-born porcine Gut-Associated Lymphoid Tissue (GALT), where these receptors can respond to intestinal bacterial components. The present findings suggest that immunobiotic Lactobacillus strains directly promote NLRP3 expression via TLR and NOD-mediated signalling, resulting in the induction of appropriate NLRP3 activation in porcine GALT. The interaction of the Lactobacillus strain with Intestinal Epithelial Cells (IECs) would induce the upregulation of MKP-1, Bcl3 and A20 expression. Lactobacillus could be taken by Antigen Presenting Cells (APCs) indirectly through M cell transport or by direct sampling from the intestinal lumen, inducing an increase in the production of the immunoregulatory cytokines IL-10 and the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β by CD172a+ CD11R1− and CD172a+ CD11R1high cells as well as the expression of SIGIRR, IRAK-M and A20. In addition, through its direct interaction with CD172a− CD11R1 low cells, the TL2937 strain would have the capacity to improve Th1 responses by increasing the production of interferon (IFN)-γ. Lactobacillus would be able to stimulate the production of immunoregulatory factors such as TGF-β in IECs, which would increase the expression of Bcl-3 and the production of IL-10 in CD172a+ APCs. Then, Lactobacillus would functionally modulate IECs and APCs in order to improve resistance to infections and to avoid non-protective inflammation. Oral administration of Lactobacillus indicated an increased percentage of peripheral blood CD4+ T lymphocytes. Lactobacillus seemed to stimulate T-cell differentiation, which could play a role in the regulation of immune function. Oral administration of Lactobacillus increased ileum interferon- and Tumour Necrosis Factor (TNF)- expression, which indicated that Lactobacillus could improve mucosal immune activity. Decreased CD25 induction on the surface of CD4+ (helper) T cells and monocytes in probiotic-fed pigs, compared with control animals, may suggest that these cells are less active in response to a challenge following probiotic administration, which in turn suggests a potential immunomodulatory role of the five-strain probiotic. The decreased surface expression of Cytotoxic T-Lymphocyte Antigen (CTLA)-4 on CD4+(helper) T cells following stimulation, which was observed as a result of probiotic treatment, is indicative of altered regulation of the inflammatory T-cell response. The increase in the CD4+CD8+ double positive T-cell subset observed after probiotic administration may reflect an increase in memory T cells in response to any subclinical infection to which animals were exposed. Bacillus spp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author (s).   2177  2496  809  33  5757  34  3580  4949  3971  6138  4556  1301  12123  1874  10634  5872  1873  5732  9003  3898  3581  1783  5410  5574  1785  10146  10130 Bacillus to sows and piglets was shown to affect the intestinal immune system of the piglets at the time of weaning (age 28 days) and shortly thereafter. The intestinal epithelial CD8/CD3 double-positive cell populations were enhanced in the probiotic group. Therefore, the increase in Lamina propria CD25+ cells is indicative of immune stimulation. The ratio of IEL (CD45+) to enterocytes was lower in the Bacillus treated group, which could be explained by lower frequencies of CD8 γδ+ T cells in the jejunal epithelium. The relative number of memory helper cells was diminished in the probiotic group. The population of bright CD8+ T cells (CD8high/CD3+), generally considered cytotoxic T-cells, was lower. Perforin was absent from most T cells and also absent from γδ T cells in porcine blood. A reduction of relative numbers of γδ T cells in the blood and in the jejunal epithelium of the piglets of the group fed with Bacillus was observed. The elevated CD4+:CD8+ ratio in the Bacillus group might have resulted from continuous feeding of Bacillus and the subsequent prolonged presence of Bacillus antigens, which might be equivalent to a secondary immune response against infection. The increased concentrations of serum immunoglobulins IgG and IgA observed for pigs fed diets supplemented with Bacillus fermentation biomass is reflective of improved immune function. Bacillus has the potential for increasing serum antibody levels and the consequent effects on weaning stress and health status may have contributed to the improved growth performance exhibited by pigs fed the supplemented diets. Changes in small intestinal morphology, and in particular an increase in villus height and VH:Crypt depth (CD) ratio, were found in pigs fed diets supplemented with the B. subtilis fermentation biomass; these could be indicative of improved gut health and digestive capacity. Other mechanisms through which Bacillus strains may alter the type of microflora in the gastrointestinal tract could be the decreased oxidationreduction potential caused by the germination of spores in the intestine, which has been shown to benefit the growth of lactobacilli. In addition, Bacillus strains could produce metabolites that inhibit pathogens, as some Bacillus species used in commercially available products have the ability to produce antimicrobials such as aminocumaim A and bacteriocin. Bacillus treatment may inhibit Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC)induced pro-inflammatory responses by suppression of MAP-kinase (MAPK) signalling pathways in intestinal epithelial cells, which provides a rationale for decreased incidence of diarrhoea in the Bacillussupplemented diet of weaned piglets. Saccharomyces spp. Refs :   12280  10429  2321  1901  6149  3580  3428  1874  1873  449  7464  11756  8700  6840  2013  6038 Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been shown to inhibit pro-inflammatory gene expression. This inhibition is associated with the modulation of both extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-1/2 and p38 signalling pathways, the increase of Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-c transcript expression, and the ETEC agglutination by yeasts. Live yeast reduced the expression of TLR2 and 4 in the intestine, suggesting that yeast may interfere with the E. coli binding to the intestinal surface. S. cerevisiae reduced ETEC F4 attachment to the ileal mucosa, and it seems likely that S. cerevisiae reduced ETEC F4 attachment to the ileal mucosa through other mechanisms, such as competition, modulation of intestinal bacterial populations, and increased barrier function. The serum levels of gamma-globulins, lysozyme, IFN-, IL-1b, and IL-6 levels increased after Saccharomyces administration. These observations may indicate activation of the immune system or an inflammatory reaction induced by an infectious agent. The addition of Saccharomyces down-regulate ETEC-induced gene expression of TNF-, Granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IL-6, chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL)-2, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand (CXCL)-2 and CCL20, reducing the overall proinflammatory www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 45 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author (s).   7370  12686  10430  5358  11673  3581  5410  5574  1785  451  448  12829  12827  12831 state caused by ETEC. Yeast might change the immune function of the gut by triggering a Th-1 response. A possible explanation may be that yeast triggers gut epithelium or gut-associated lymphoid tissue Th-1 responses by activating macrophages. IFN-γ, which can activate phagocytosis by macrophages, was increased in gut mucosa by yeast supplementation. Thus, weaning-induced systemic immune response alleviated by yeast cells may be due to improvements in Th-1 response in gut mucosa. Yeast has been shown to promote the growth of lactobacilli, suggesting that the lower numbers of faecal coliforms in the treated group could be interpreted as a positive effect of yeast on the enteric ecosystem, intestinal integrity, and health. The higher proportions of CD4+, CD8+ and CD4+CD8+ peripheral blood lymphocytes in the yeast group suggest that systemic cell-mediated immunity was activated by the changes induced by yeast. In pigs, CD4+ and CD4+CD8+ lymphocytes are Thelper cells. Activation of these subpopulations stimulates plasma cells for antibody production, and changes in these subpopulations might indicate a concurrent increase in plasma antibodies. No changes in gut architecture, mucus thickness, goblet cell population, or cortisol level were observed. Enterococcus spp. Refs :  6683  9177  10182  6889  8598  10566  11701  4588  6274  10534  3580  5738  1235  6757  5736  4695  661  11003  12123  3579  6718  4401  6811  3581  945  1784  946  5737  10131 Findings suggest that E. faecium EF1 possesses remarkable immunomodulatory activity in intestinal mucosa by suppressing synthesis of the proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, IL-8 and IFN-). IL-10 was statistically increased in both jejunal and ileal mucosa of probiotic supplemented piglets. TNF- production suggests that E. faecium EF1 may promote early activation of the intestinal immune system. TLR2 and TLR9 transcription levels, measured by quantitative real time (qRT)polymerase chain reaction (PCR), were up-regulated in the jejunal mucosa of piglets treated with E. faecium EF1. Compounds of E. faecium EF1 cell-wall could act as adjuvants of the mucosal immune response and E. faecium EF1 Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is major component of the E. faecium-mediated activation. Application of E. faecium affects the systemic and intestinal immunity of weaning piglets by diminishing the population of circulating and intraepithelial CD8T cell. The levels of cytotoxic T cells (CD8+) in the jejunal epithelium of piglets in the probiotic group were significantly reduced. The observed decline in the CD8+ IEL populations was the result of an increased population of CD4-CD8 cells, i.e. that the E. faecium probiotic strain had a proliferative effect on a cell population of unknown function. The reduction in -haemolytic E. coli isolates in probiotic-treated animals suggests a reduced pathogenic load in the probiotic group. Piglets supplemented with E. faecium NCIMB 10415 exhibited a postweaning dysregulation in the expression patterns of both pro-and antiinflammatory cytokine expression in the intestinal tissues and spleen. Piglets in the supplemented group showed significantly reduced levels of IL-8, IL-10 and the co-stimulatory molecule CD86 mRNA expression in ileal Peyer's patches. The expression of CTLA4, an inhibitor of T-cell activation/proliferation, showed similar levels of expression in all tissues examined, particularly in ileal Peyer's patches post-weaning, where IL-8, IL-10 and CD86 transcript levels were significantly reduced relative to control animals. Blood serum cytokine protein levels showed elevated TGF in pre-weaning piglets which, together with IL-6, may have suppressed IFN production in the probiotic-fed animals. These observations suggest that prolonged feed supplementation of sows and piglets with the probiotic strain E. faecium NCIMB 10415 (SF68) results in an anti-inflammatory/immuno-suppressive response in piglets. Pediococcus spp. The attachment of ETEC F4 to the ileal mucosa was significantly lower for www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 46 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). :  2321  3579  1549  4401  12122  11708  6201  6038  9003  9004  3581 the pigs receiving P. acidilactici + S. cerevisiae. Ingestion of Pedicoccus after birth has the potential to modulate the establishment of CD8+ cells and the secretion of intestinal IgA in the ileum. IL-6 and IL-8 were significantly increased in pigs receiving P. acidilactici + S. cerevisiae. The expression of pBD-2, (antimicrobial peptide) and of IL-12p35 (activation of mucosal innate immunity against enteric pathogens) also tended to be increased in the P.acidilactici group only. The CD8+low T lymphocytes in the ileum and CD8+high cells in the mesenteric lymph nodes (MLN) tended to be increased following administration of P. acidilactici compared with the control group. The results indicate that the increased number of lymphocyte subpopulations in the gut could result from stimulation of the local immune system by probiotic bacteria. After challenge with ETEC, the bacterial translocation to MLN was reduced. Enterocyte proliferation in crypt epithelium decreased after the administration of Pedicoccus. Villus length, crypt depth, mucus-producing cell counts, and thickness of the mucus layer remained unaffected in the small intestine. Bifidobacterium spp. Aspergillus oryzae increased TLR4, IL-8, and TNF- expression when we incubated porcine intestinal epithelial cells (IPEC)-J2 with A. oryzae in the absence of E. coli. These results suggest that the A. oryzae likely presents some immunogenic compound that interacts with enterocytes and triggers inflammatory response. Itis possible that this effect is due to galactomannans present in the membrane of the Aspergillus. Escherichia spp. Refs: 808 1328 The improved performance observed with probiotic (2 E. coli strains) supplementation is likely mediated by a reduction in E. coli K88 colonisation of the mucosal surface and subsequent reduction of postweaning diarrhoea. Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 provided a significant favourable trophic effect on the colonic mucosa. In the jejunum, E. coli administration was associated with significantly lower values of height of cryptal mucosa as well as height and width of villi. In the colon, the height of cryptal mucosa was significantly higher in the E. coli group. Streptococcus spp. In porcine diets, Streptococcus is supplemented as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, its specific mode of action could not be identified. Propionibacterium spp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Sixty-four studies concern prebiotic, the most common of which were mannan oligosaccharides (MOS, 12 studies), glucans (9 studies), fructooligosaccharides (FOS, four studies), inulin (source of FOS, seven studies), the yeast cell wall (YCW), (source of MOS among other substances, six studies) and chitooligosaccharides (COS, six studies). Megasphaera spp. 1 The addition of M. elsdenii to diets supplemented with L. plantarum Lq80 (LM) may increase butyrate production. The caecal and colonic crypt depths were longer in piglets in the LM group than in those in the L. plantarum and control groups. The colonic short chain fatty acid (SCFA) level and the thickness of the colonic mucosa were significantly higher in piglets in the LM group. Mannan oligosaccharide (MOS) Refs :  6033  1720  4320  6149  1718  1719  1570  1901  1337  8524  9004  2207 MOS reduced IL-1, IL-8, and TNF- expression and showed some effects in TLR4 and TLR5 expression as well as an increase in IgG concentration. Gene expression of IL-1, IL-6, myeloid differentiation factor 88, TLR 4, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II, and dead box polypeptide increased in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of MOS-fed pigs. This suggests that MOS enhances disease resistance in pigs and supports the fact that MOS induced a rapid increase in leukocytes following infection. In PRRS infected pigs, MOS reduced the expression of IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1, MIP-1, monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-1, and TLR4 genes in PBMC. MOS decreased the jejunal numbers of enterobacteria and increased the villus:crypt ratio. In other studies, dietary MOS did not affect the serum concentration of TNF- and tended to increase that of IL-10. Refs :  4671  5712  2982  4393  10969  12229  12118  10748  11086 -Glucan did not alter final BW, ADG, or G:F. The β-glucan content of the diet did not impact villus height or crypt depth. Plasma IL-10 levels were also increased in the piglets fed with β-glucan whereas plasma IFN- and TNF- levels were decreased. Treatment of -glucan alone might decrease inflammatory response against Gramnegative bacterial infection via the inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine production and the enhancement of anti-inflammatory cytokine production. Supplementation of dietary -glucan resulted in an increased concentration of peripheral erythrocytes, leukocytes, lymphocytes, and eosinophils. No obvious dose-effects were observed except in the concentration of CD4+ cells, which increased as the -glucans content increased. Blood immune cell variables remained within physiological ranges, supporting the clinical observation that supplementing the diet of pigs with -glucans did not adversely affect their health. The proportion of CD45RA+ T-cell populations (mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer's patch CD4+ cells and Peripheral blood lymphocyte (PBL) CD8+ cells) was greater in pigs fed -glucan. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). β-Glucans did not stimulate any pro-or anti-inflammatory cytokine markers in the ileal epithelial cells. In contrast, the expression of a panel of pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1a, IL-10, TNF-and IL-17a) was down-regulated in the colon following exposure to glucans. Piglets receiving food supplemented with -glucans for two weeks after weaning showed a decreased susceptibility to ETEC. Oral supplementation with -1,3/1,6-glucan resulted in temporarily increased serum IgG concentrations in weanling piglets. The overall performance of piglets was unaffected by treatment. Inulin increased total aerobes in the stomach and jejunum, whereas enterococci declined in the colons of the inulin group. Furthermore, decreasing colonic acetic acid and increasing lactic acid was observed for inulin. Inulin may contribute to the regulation of Fe absorption either directly by affecting SCFA synthesis or through changes in bacterial population and/or by affecting mucin gene expression. Inulin is able to increase the level of cytokine (IL-1, IL-8, IL-6, TNF-, IFN-) and IgA concentration. Yeast cell wall (YCW) After chitosan adheres to the intestinal mucosa, its amine is recognised by the immune system. Immune response pathways are activated, and the gut-associated lymphoid immune system is stimulated to produce lymphokines and inflammatory mediators, secrete cytokines IL-1, IL-6, etc., reduce calprotectin and TLR4 protein expression, and enhance the cell-mediated immune response. COS helps to prevent inflammatory intestinal disorders, including weaning-associated intestinal inflammation. COS increases some presumably-beneficial bacterial species and SCFA concentrations in the intestinal luminal content while decreasing the amounts of several potential pathogens, concentrations of ammonia, and branched-chain fatty acid (BCFAs) in this content. COS decreased feed conversion ratio, villus width, crypt depth, and TLR4 mRNA expression but increased villus length, villus length/crypt depth, and GCs. COS enhanced IL-1 gene expression in jejunal mucosa and lymph nodes as well as serum levels of IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, IgA, IgG and IgM. COS may enhance the cell-mediated immune response in piglets that are weaned early by modulating the production of cytokines and antibodies. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Galactooligosaccharides increase concentrations of gut beneficial bacteria, bifidobacteria and lactobacilli, as well as concentrations of short-chain fatty acids, but they decrease nutrient digestibility. Dietary GOS suppressed eosinophil infiltration in the small intestine and tended to improve the growth performance of weaning piglets. 2 Refs: 7464 6840 The positive effect of XOS on villi length (villus height was increased) can improve the nutrient uptake from the intestine, which could result in improved growth performance. XOS seem to have a potential prebiotic effect on lactobacilli from the piglets' intestinal tracts but no effect was noted on Bifidobacteria. Polydextrose 2 Concentrations of SCFA and biogenic amines increased in the large intestine. In contrast, concentrations of luminal IgA decreased distally but the expression of mucosal Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 had a tendency to increase in the mucosa toward the distal colon. There was a reduction in concentrations of SCFA and tryptamine and an increase in concentrations of spermidine in the colon upon polydextrose supplementation. The addition of short chain FOS (scFOS) and polydextrose to formula increased acetate concentrations and decreased luminal pH on d 7 in the ascending colon. This finding may be understoodas beneficial, as an in vitro study showed that acetate inhibited the growth of many common pathogens in a concentration-dependent manner and that inhibition was most pronounced at a lower pH. 1 AXOS may exert its attenuating effect on the ETEC-induced small intestinal response by influencing the expression of particular innate response proteins, such as the Prostatic Acid Phosphatase protein. Levan 1 Dietary supplementation with 0.10% levan type fructan improved growth performance, digestibility of nitrogen, gross energy, and faecal Lactobacillus counts and had a beneficial effect on immune response during an inflammatory challenge (increased white blood cells, lymphocyte percentage, serum cortisol, TNF-, and IL-6). Galacto-mannanoligosaccharides (GMOS) 1 Serum levels of IL-1, IL-2, and IL-6 in piglets fed the GMOS diet were higher than the levels in control piglets. These findings suggest that GMOS may enhance the cell-mediated immune response in piglets weaned early by modulating the production of cytokines and antibodies. 1 Supplementation of mannans in the diets of weanling pigs improved gain and efficiency and intermittently affected selected components of the piglets' immune function both systemically and enterically. The percentage of neutrophils was lower and the percentage of lymphocytes was higher in the blood. Lamina propria macrophages, isolated from pigs fed diets containing mannans, phagocytised a greater number of sheep red blood cells. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 50 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). A substantial number of studies (68) concerning plant extracts exist. Soybean oligosaccharides promoted the growth of bacterial species that are potentially beneficial to the host and increased the concentration of SCFA in the ileum and colon while simultaneously reducing the numbers of potentially harmful bacteria and the production of protein-derived catabolites. Soybean oligosaccharides was found to increase the expression of the tight junction protein ZO-1 mRNA but to diminish the expression of pro-inflamatory cytokines TNF-, IL-1, and IL-8 mRNA in both the ileum and colon, whereas supplementation increased that of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. SOY (soy di-and tripeptide diet) piglets had a lower crypt depth than and a similar muscle thickness to those in the negative control group. SOY peptide treated pigs had reduced IL17a and RORC gene expression compared to positive controls, suggesting that soy peptides may modulate this pathway. Cytokine IL17a activates the NF- and MAPK proinflammatory cascade, and recent studies indicate that RORC is necessary for T-helper (Th)-17 commitment and differentiation. Soy peptide supplementation lowered the expression of IFN-, TNF, and IL12b. The Treg transcription factor, FOXP3, was highly expressed in the ileum of SOY pigs. FOXP3+ Treg (the Treg lineage-specific transcription factor that suppresses RAR-related orphan receptor C (RORC) and inhibits Th17 differentiation) was upregulated. The density of cells was approximately five times more numerous in the villus Lamina Propria (LP) of the duodenal mucosa of heat-treated soy protein (HTSP) piglets than in the ethanol-treated soy protein (ETSP) group. An approximately three-fold increase in IgM and IgA, and a six fold increase in IgG1 and IgG2 positive cells,was observed in the lamina propria (LP) of the duodenal mucosa of HTSP piglets compared with ETSP piglets. The proportions of T-lymphocyte in the duodenal mucosa differed between groups with regard to CD2+ lymphocytes and especially in CD4+ T cells, which increased approximately six-fold in the epithelium and three-fold in the LP of the HTSP piglets. Beta-sitosterol (phytosterol of soybean) increased viable peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) numbers, activating swine dendritic cells (DCs). Antigenic soybean product increased diarrhoea, reducing the size of duodenal villi and eosinophil density in the duodenal mucosa, which was greater than the non-antigenic soybean product. In vitro, sub-inhibitory concentrations of carvacrol affect virulence of Salmonella, leading to reduced motility and the invasion of epithelial cells. A mixture composed of carvacrol, capsicum oleoresin, and cinnamaldehyde showed antioxidative properties under dietary-induced oxidative stress conditions. The mixture effectively protected the pigs' blood lymphocytes from oxidative DNA damage. Dietary XT (5% carvacrol, 3% cinnamaldehyde, and 2% capsicum oleoresin) reduced intraepithelial lymphocyte numbers in jejunum and the percentage of blood cytotoxic cells and B lymphocytes in LN; however, XT increased blood monocytes and the density of lamina propria lymphocytes in the colon. Monoterpene phenols, such as thymol and carvacrol, interact with the cell membrane by H bonding, rendering the membranes and mitochondria more permeable, disintegrating the outer cell membrane, and inhibiting the growth of Gram (−) bacteria. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 7799 group, preventing the action of important cell enzymes such as amino decarboxylases. Cinnamaldehyde strongly inhibits C. perfringens (Gram (+)) and Bacteroides fragilis (Gram (−)), but exhibits weak or no inhibitory activity against Bifidobacterium longum or Lactobacillus acidophilus (Gram (+)). A mixture composed of carvacrol, capsicum oleoresin, and cinnamaldehyde showed antioxidative properties under dietary-induced oxidative stress conditions. The mixture effectively protected the pigs' blood lymphocytes from oxidative DNA damage. Dietary XT (5% carvacrol, 3% cinnamaldehyde, and 2% capsicum oleoresin) reduced intraepithelial lymphocyte numbers in jejunum and the percentages of blood cytotoxic cells and B lymphocytes in LN; however, XT increased blood monocytes and the density of lamina propria lymphocytes in the colon. Other Chinese herbs The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 1760 liver, the contents of IL-2 and INF-γ, jejunal mucosa GALT, and complement levels. These findings indicate that ABP is effective in improving the growth performance and defending capacity. Refs: 6605 947 Feed conversion can be improved with the addition of Echinacea to diets. Repeated short-time application of Echinacea has immune stimulating effects in fattening pigs. It also increased phagocytosis rate and the number of lymphocytes. Refs: 2630 5247 The dietary addition of liquorice has no effect on swine growth. The experimental diets containing liquorice activated the intestinal immune system, including the Peyer's patch, as the primary step resulting in higher IgA production in the salivary tissue. Dietary addition of liquorice induced an antinflammation effect in the swine, brought about by a second injection of sheep red blood cells (SRBC) into the dermal tissue. Sugar cane 2 Refs: 6443 6444 Sugar cane extract (SCE)-treated pigs showed increased growth. Moreover, SCE has a broad biological effect in raising innate immunity to infections (enhancement of cytotoxic of natural killer (NK) cells and phagocytosis by neutrophils and monocytes), lymphocyte activation, and IFN- production that may contribute to the restriction of PrV infection. Tannin did not improve the growth performance but also had no deleterious effects on selected blood parameters. Allium derivatives 1 In animals infected withE.coli, Allium derivatives reduced average diarrhoea score from d 0 to 2 and d 6 to 11. Allium derivatives decreased TNF- and haptoglobin on d 5, white blood cell (WBC) counts and neutrophils on d 11, and ileal macrophages and neutrophils on d 5. Pigs fed Allium also had higher villus height. Therefore, Allium may alleviate the overstimulation of the systemic immunity and early immune response of pigs infected with E. coli. Origanum derivatives 1 Origanum is supplemented in porcine diets as mixtures with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it.  Limonene is supplemented in porcine diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Syzygium aromaticum 1 Eugenol is supplemented in porcine diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). derivatives Refs: 1902 responses, including IgM and IgG and IFN- concentration of serum and decreased leukocytes, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and cortisol concentration in the blood of fattening pigs. These results indicate that additive wormwood may benefit pigs, increase their immunity to infection, and may play a role in the reduction of stress. Pisum sativum 1 Feeding pigs that are weaned early diets containing spray-dried plasma proteins, pea protein isolate, plus egg yolk antibody -or a combination of pea protein isolate and spray-dried plasma protein-after weaning minimises gastrointestinal disorders associated with E. coli infection. 1 High-moisture maize fermented with L. acidophilus or P. acidilactici as a diet supplement was able to modulate pig intestinal microbiota by reducing the diversity and richness of intestinal bacteria. 1 Feeding of potato protein was effective in linearly reducing the populations of microbes in faeces and the contents of the cecum, colon, and rectum. Feeding potato protein to weanling piglets is an effective means of improving growth performance and reducing pathogenic bacteria. Linum usitatissimum 1 : 1916 Probiotic L. plantarum, in combination with flax-seed oil rich in n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), has anti-inflammatory properties, stimulating Th1-mediated cell immunity and phagocytosis and tending to regulate inflammatory response induced by ETEC. Trigonella derivatives 1 The piglets fed Trigonella foenum graecum L.  Anise oil is supplemented in porcine diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. 1 Feed with the single supplement of Jerusalem artichoke significantly enhances the defence and regeneration processes in the intestine of pigs. Stimulation of -defensin (2 and 3) production in the intestine through dietary modulation (Lactobacillus reuteri and Pediococcus pentosaceus with lower dose of Jerusalem artichoke) could promote intestinal health in pigs, thereby reducing the occurrence of infections in pig herds and the subsequent use of antibiotic treatment. Quillaja saponaria 1 IgG and (C-reactive protein) CRP was greater in saponin-supplemented pigs. Saponin supplementation during the post weaning period seemed to potentiate an immune response in the weaned piglet but had a detrimental effect on the utilisation of feed. Ceratonia siliqua locust bean 1 The treatment of piglets infected with ETEC K88 with locust bean (LB) reduced the expression of IL-1, IL-8, TNF-, and TLR-5 but not TLR4. The study demonstrates the ability of LB to interfere in the pathogenic process of the ETEC K88, particularly reducing the adhesion of the pathogen to the epithelium and modifying the innate immune response. There are 28 studies concerning animal by-products, and the product most frequently studied was the spray-dried product (SDP) (11 studies). www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 54 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The effect of SDP on the performance is unclear. SDP improved duodenal villus height and duodenal villus height to crypt depth ratio in piglets. SDP also reduced malondialdehyde content in mucosa. In the mucosa, SDP decreased TNF-, IL-6, IL-1, TGF-, and soluble IL-2 receptor contents. The cytokines in the serum were not affected by SDP. TNF- and IL-1 mRNA in all tissues and IL-6 mRNA in the adrenal gland, spleen, pituitary gland, and liver were all reduced in pigs fed adiet with SDP compared to those fed a diet without it. Piglets fed porcine SDP (SDPP) diet exhibited higher levels of IgG. Dietary SDP plasma reduced the percentage of blood monocytes and macrophages (SWC3+) in ileal Peyer's patches (PP) and lymph nodes (LN), of B lymphocytes (CD21+) and γδ+ T cells (γδ T cell receptor (TCR)+) in LN, and of intraepithelial lymphocytes as well as the density of lamina propria cells in the colon. Egg-yolk antibodies might protect both neonatal and 21-day-old weaned piglets from diarrhoea induced by a challenge with E. coli K88. It is likely that the mechanism by which egg-yolk antibodies protect pigs from ETEC induced diarrhoea is that the antibodies against the fimbriae of ETEC react with the receptor binding component of ETEC (fimbriae), thereby preventing them from attaching and adhering to the mucosa of the intestines of piglets. Pigs fed diets containing egg yolk antibodies had longer villi, less severe diarrhoea, and grew faster. The oral administration of bovine colostrum seems to improve and retain the immunological properties of the structures associated with the gastrointestinal tract in weaning piglets by generating different types of responses protecting the pigs from infectious and allergic diseases. The immunomodulatory effects of bovine colostrum primarily target the GALT, which responds by producing, at different levels, both Th1 pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-2, IFN- and IL-12) and anti-inflammatory Th2 cytokines (IL-4 and IL-10). The CD21+/CD3+ cells populations of the ileal Peyer's patch (PP) were markedly affected, and a decrease in IFN- was also observed in the ileal PP consecutive to colostrum administration. Therefore, it is plausible to speculate that bovine colostrum may influence the development of the IgA response by potentiating a Th2 response in the ileal PP. The general increase in cytokine production by mucosal and systemic immune cells isolated from piglets fed dietary bovine lactoferrin (bLF) indicates a priming of the immune system. IL-10 was increased under both unstimulated and LPS-stimulated conditions, which potentially limits inflammation. In LF piglets, the spleen cells, but not MLN, increased with regard to IFN- and TNF- production; MLN, but not spleen cells, tended to increase IL-6 production, demonstrating organ-specific effects of dietary bLF treatment. Strong TNF- and IL-6 production indicates a robust innate immune response by the cells from piglets fed bLF compared with those fed the control diet. The improved IFN- response indicates that dietary bLF may be most important in T-helper-1-type adaptive immune responses and thus is vital to protection from infection. Pigs supplemented with LF had greater villus heights and lower crypt depths at the small intestinal mucosa, which may contribute to improved growth performance. Supplemental LF significantly improved the relative abundance of mRNA for PR-39 and protegrin-1, suggesting that LF can regulate the expression of the 2 cathelicidins in the bone marrow of weanling piglets. LF could regulate transcription of the IL-1 gene and may also regulate transcription of other natural genes containing the LF binding sites. Dietary supplementation with lactoferrin increased recovery from diarrhoea, enhanced serum glutathione peroxidase (GPx), peroxidase (POD) and total antioxidant content www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 55 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). (T-AOC), liver GPx, POD, superoxide dismutase (SOD) and T-AOC, Fe, total Fe-binding capacity, IgA, IgG and IgM levels (P<0.05); meanwhile, it decreased the concentration of E. coli in the ileum, caecum, and colon and increased the concentration of lactobacilli and bifidobacteria in the ileum, caecum, and colon, promoting the development of the villus-crypt architecture of the small intestine. Refs: 6524 4320 6117 Fish oil may partially improve intestinal barrier function via improving the expression of intestinal tight junction proteins. Fish oil exerts its beneficial effect on the intestine by alleviating the intestinal inflammatory response. The protective effects of fish oil supplementation on intestinal integrity were closely related to the reduction ofthe expression of intestinal proinflammatory cytokines through inhibition ofthe TLR4 signalling pathway. Other substances were investigated in 58 studies. These mainly concern organic acids derivatives and fatty acids (14 studies), minerals (11 studies), and amino acids and their derivatives (19 studies). Feeding AA supplemented diet ameliorated the change in gut morphology and stimulated the expression of ciliary dynein heavy chain 5 in the jejunum, indicating that AA are beneficial to the growth of intestinal mucosa and the movement of villus. The reason for this might be that the specific non-and semi-essential AA are metabolised in enterocytes for proliferation, energy generation, and protection of the small intestinal mucosa. Cysteine significantly reduced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-, IL-6, IL-12p40, IL-1, resulting in increased expression of the apoptosis initiator caspase-8 and decreasing expression of the pro-survival genes cFLIP and Bcl-xL. IL-8 and MIP-2, implicated in neutrophil and monocyte recruitment, were reduced upon treatment with Cysteine (Cys). Cys supplementation was able to significantly aid the recovery of piglets from colitis. Neutralisation of IL-6 trans-signalling, either with antibodies working against the IL-6 receptor or a gp130-Fc fusion protein, suppressed colitis activity and induced T-cell apoptosis in vivo. Growth performance, histological structures, and gut barrier function were improved. In addition to its known anti-oxidant effects, Cys modulated local cytokine gene expression, suppressing pro-inflammatory and chemotactic gene expression and promoting the expression of pro-apoptotic pathways, suggesting that cysteine supplementation may support the recovery of mucosal homeostasis. Treatment of -glucan alone or plus L-theanine might decrease inflammatory response against Gram (-) bacterial infection via the inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine production and the enhancement of anti-inflammatory cytokine production. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). innate immune response (regenerating islet-derived 3 gamma (REG3G), Surfactant protein D (SFTPD) and lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP)) in the jejunal tissue. Several genes involved in the intestinal barrier appear to be changed by dietary Trp in healthy pigs that are positive for the presence of the intestinal receptors for ETEC. The mechanism by which tryptophan reduces the stimulatory effect of several bacteriaassociated molecular patterns in the genes involved in the response of the intestinal barrier in ETEC-susceptible pigs has yet to be established. Dietary SIDT (SID Threonine) increased the relative thymus body weight and duodenal villus width. Serum specific IgG concentrations increased in response to the increased intake of true ileal digestible threonine. IL-1 concentration significantly decreased, and the IL-6 concentration significantly increased in the jejunum of piglets. Supplementation with SIDT improved the intestinal mucosal defensive function after E. coli challenge. The protective function of threonine for the rapid production of gut mucosa SIgA under E. coli challenge may be mediated through IL-6 regulation. The increase in dietary SIDT level indicated beneficial effects in allowing duodenum villi to widen and jejunal villus height to crypt depth ratio to decrease. In addition, the increased dietary SIDT level was beneficial in alleviating the small mucosa damage caused by E. coli challenge. The supplementation of glutamine and glutamine plus glutamate improved feed conversion and reduced villi atrophy in post-weaning pigs. Glutamine was able to alleviate the stressful condition and inflammation and to improve immunity and growth performance in the early starter stage. In response to dietary glutamine supplementation, expression of eight genes was downregulated in the small intestine. These genes are related to cellular signalling transduction [casein kinase 1 epsilon and MAPK-6], the cell cycle [Rho-related GTP-binding protein], apoptosis [KLF-10], immune activation (La antoantigen homolog and ICAM-1), protein modification [peptidylprolyl isomerase G], and gene expression (pre-mRNA cleavage complex II). Enhanced expression of antigens and activation of leukocytes in the intestinal epithelium due to activation of the MAPK-6 signalling may contribute to intestinal dysfunction and diarrhoea in weanling pigs. Another beneficial effect of glutamine supplementation is increased expression of six genes related to transcription regulation [AF-9 protein], lipid metabolism (endozepine), iron absorption (heme-binding protein), cytoskeletal structure and function (myosin), defence against pathological microorganisms [IL-13R-a-1 and endozepine], and regulation of nutrient metabolism (signal recognition particle 72K chain). Feeding glutamine has beneficial effects in alleviating growth depression of E. coli K88+-challenged pigs, primarily through maintenance of intestinal morphology and function, and/or possibly through modulation of the somatotrophic axis. Supplementing the diet with Glycine (Gly)-Glutamine (Gln) improved the growth and intestinal integrity of weanling piglets. Gln supplementation during the weaning period is useful in reducing the early stages in weaning-related gastrointestinal infections by suppressing the inflammatory and regulatory cytokine response in the gut and decreasing damage to tight junction proteins and intestinal electrolyte movement. The adverse effects of LPS on intestinal integrity could be mediated by the decline in average daily feed intake ADFI, but could also be directly affected as a result of a systemic inflammatory response (IL-1 secretion), whereas Gly-Gln may have the ability to limit this proinflammatory response. Reduced performance was observed in glycinin-or b-conglycinin sensitised piglets. The Increased Proliferative Index, Apoptotic Index, and relative metabolic rate (REMR) were only observed in duodenum of piglets fed with glycinin or b-conglycinin. Glutamate supplementation numerically improved duodenal villus height and IgG levels. Organic acids improved growth performance primarily via reducing pathogenic bacteria and increasing beneficial bacterial population in the gut and faeces. Diets supplemented with organic acids fail to affect the growth performance of weaned pigs. Diets supplemented with organic acids enhanced PBMC and MLN proliferation by Concanavalin (Con) A. Poke weed mitogen (PWM) stimulation was more evidenced than the organic acids effect on spenlocyte proliferation, Ig or antiSEP titer response. The mechanisms for the effects of diet supplemented with organic acids on enhancing T-and B-cell proliferations were dependent on energy supply, and other pathways still need to be understood. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). IBD and attenuated growth suppression in pigs by activating the colonic peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-g, whereas n-3 PUFA accelerated remission by activating PPAR d. Furthermore, mixtures of CLA and n-3 PUFA accelerated recovery by activating PPAR d, i.e. induced uncoupling protein (UCP)-3 and upregulating the expression of KGF in the colon. CLA-supplementation increased the numbers of +-T cells in the colonic mucosa in pigs with bacterial-induced colitis. CLA favoured a CD8+ T cell phenotype with an increased predominance of naive cells (CD8+CD29low and CD8+CD45RC+). This naive CD8 Tcell phenotype in the peripheral blood of uninfected pigs fed CLA originated from an enhanced thymic output of CD8 T-cells. After the PCV2 challenge, this was overshadowed by the expansion of antigen-specific CD8 T-cells and increased CD25 expression. In T-cell immunoregulation, dietary CLA differentially modulated PPAR- and PPAR- expression in PCV2-infected pigs. Greater expression of PPAR- in the lymph nodes of pigs fed with the control diets was associated with attenuated CD8+ T-cell responses. Conversely, the enhanced PPAR- expression in the lymph nodes of pigs fed CLA was linked to increased CD8 responses. Microencapsulated organic acids (MOA) group (20% citric acid, 20% fumaric acid, 10% malic acid, and 10% phosphoric acid) IGF-I concentrations declined from preinfection concentrations on d 2, increased on d 4, and declined again until d 13. The serum concentrations of the cytokines IL-6 and IL-1 were not generally affected by SalT challenge. Dietary Sodium Butyrate (SB) could regulate and enhance the immune function of piglets by increasing the serum IgG concentration and IgA+ cell count in jejunum. SB may reduce the adverse effects of weaning stress and may play an important role in maintaining the integrity of intestinal mucosa. Acidification of the diet with citric acid positively affected the feed conversion ratio and reduced pathogenic bacterial load. Dietary supplementation of citric acid increased beneficial bacterial counts and serum IgG concentration compared to the control group. Giving alkylglycerol fatty acids to sows in late gestation and when lactating can improve passive immunity transfer to piglets. Feeding flax (long-chain n-3 fatty acids) to sows can have beneficial effects on litter performance; specific effects can differ depending on whether it is fed as seed, meal, or oil. Feeding flax in any form to sows in late pregnancy and those that are lactating enhanced the immune response of piglets, which may explain the increased survival rate of these piglets. The addition of citric acids to the basal diets during late gestation and lactation did not affect sow and litter performance but could improve the utilisation of crude protein (CP), calcium (Ca), and phosphorus (P) as well as the immunoglobulin levels of plasma, colostrum, and milk. Refs :  1406  7196  3428  10037  4866  4930  1235  1570  3220  6243  1795 Zinc (Zn) inhibits the induction of NF- in response to pathogens, possibly through heat shock proteins. Reduced intestinal expression of NF- target genes and subsequent inflammation may result in reduced tissue damage and may impact infection. Maintenance of normal gut function through reduced inflammation could result in an improvement in piglet performance, as seen with dietary zinc oxide (ZnO) treatment. Supplementation of feed with Zn immediately after weaning could positively affect the immune responses of piglets infected with Salmonella Typhimurium, but only for a period. After two weeks, all positive effects disappeared, and negative effects such as higher shedding of salmonellae, lower T-cell frequencies, and worse performance, began to occur. Zinc supplementation had no effect either on the number of excreted E. coli and enterococci per gram of faeces or on the functions of circulating neutrophils, but it increased the growth of the piglets during the first two weeks postweaning. Zinc oxide reduced bacterial translocation to the MLN, and this may have resulted from immune system modulation and enhanced intestinal IgA concentration. Bioplex Zn tended to increase the weight of the ileum containing Peyer's patches. ZnMet increased serum and liver Zn concentrations, the number of goblet cells, length of jejunal villus epithelium, and tended to enhance jejunum mucosa thickness. Interactive effects for higher jejunal villi height and villi:crypt ratio and increased ileal goblet cell counts were apparent for pigs from ZnAA-supplemented sows that also received nutriment-intubation of ZnMet. The selenium (Se) enriched probiotics (SP) improved growth performance of piglets. Both selenium selenite (SS) and SP increased blood glutathione peroxidase activity and tissue www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 58 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). thioredoxin reductase 1 mRNA expression, with SP being higher than SS. All P, SS, and SP supplementation increased the superoxide dismutase activity, glutathione content, TCRinduced T lymphocyte proliferation, and IL-2 concentration and decreased malondialdehyde content. The beneficial effects may be explained by two possible reasons: (i) there is an additivity or a synergistic effect between probiotics and Se, and (ii) the more robust antioxidant effects of the SP product may be due to the organic Se it contained relative to the inorganic Se contained in the SS. The potential effect of metallic silver as a dietary additive on intake and growth of weaned piglets could be mediated through its antimicrobial properties, either against certain bacterial groups or reducing the microbial load of the small intestine. Animals feeding diets with Sericite showed increased blood IgG concentration, lymphocyte, and monocyte percentage and decreased faecal E. coli population counts. Sericite also increased faecal Lactobacillus counts. Diets supplemented with organic acids and nucleotides failed to affect the growth performance of weaned pigs. Dietary supplementation with organic acids and nucleotides had a synergetic effect on the Peyer's patches and mesenteric lymph node lymphocyte proliferation. The diets supplemented with nucleotides increased the bile and plasma IgA levels and modulated the gastrointestinal tract in weaned pigs. Diets supplemented with 0.5% nucleotide base also increased PBMC proliferation. Supplementing the diet of weaning piglets with pure nucleotides resulted in an increase in plasma IgA concentrations without altering gut morphology, bacterial numbers, and growth performance. Nucleotide supplementation numerically improved duodenal villus height. Treatments with CpG oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) reduced bacterial load in the phases at days 3-5 post challenge. The chemokine (CXC) (CXCL10 and CXCL11) and CC chemokine (CCL4 and CCL5) mRNA expressions were elevated in the intestinal tissues from animals treated either intranasally or orally with CpG ODN, compared to untreated controls. This significantly enhanced mRNA expressions for cathelicidins (PR-39 and protegrin-1) and did so moderately for -defensin (pBD1 and pBD2), as observed in CpG-treatments. Additionally, significant production of cytokines (IL-12, IFN-, and MCP-1) and F4-specific antibodies (IgG/IgA) was detected in intestinal washing, following intranasal and oral CpG-treatment. Vitamin E supplemented to pigs can effectively protect their blood lymphocytes against oxidative DNA damage, thus suggesting potentially beneficial effects on the immune www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 59 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The most common substances and agents studied with regard totheir effects on the immunity of poultry were probiotics and prebiotics (Table 6) . (Table 16) . In general terms, the supplementation of poultry diets with Lactobacillus spp. (113 studies) improves the performance of broilers and decreases the numbers of coliforms in the cecum 10 and 20 days after feeding. Lactobacillus also significantly increased the total VFA in the ileum and cecum and reduces the caecal pH values. Increments in the villus height (VH) and crypt depth (CD) of chickens fed Lactobacillus spp. supplemented diets could improve the absorptive surface area in the GI tract. The Lactobacillus spp. birds showed increased goblet cell (GC) numbers, total GC area, GC mean size and mucosal thickness. Lactobacillus spp. has an immunoregulatory effect of dietary probiotics of the local immune system in broiler The results of the studies indicate that piglets fed a diet containing the antimicrobial peptide cecropin AD showed improved performance and reduced incidence of diarrhoea. The beneficial effects of cecropin AD post E. coli challenge in weaned piglets appears to be mediated through changes in immune status. Antimicrobial peptide (AMP)-A3 has the potential to suppress harmful intestinal microflora in weanling pigs. AMP-A3 had no effects on serum immunoglobulin concentrations. The results indicate that improved growth performance in the studies is not due to enhanced immune function but rather might be due to improved gut barrier function via exclusion of pathogenic microorganisms (Clostridium and coliforms) and improved intestinal morphology. AMP-A3 showed beneficial effects on growth performance, coefficients of total tract apparent digestibility (CTTAD) of dry matter (DM) and crude protein(CP), intestinal morphology, and intestinal and faecal microflora. Refs: 3937 8519 Lactulose supplementation at 10 g/kg of the diet increased growth performance and modified fermentation in the colon with reductions of the blood urea nitrogen. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 60 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). chickens. Birds with the Lactobacillus diet showed an increase in intra-epithelial lymphocytes (IEL) expressing the surface markers CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, and TCR. Lactobacillus spp. induces IL-1, IL-12p40, IL-10, IL-18, TGF-4, and IFN- in gut-associated lymphoid tissues of chicken. The immunomodulatory action (inflammatory / anti-inflammatory response) of Lactobacillus is dependent on the characteristics and quantity of the strain involved. Lactobacillus spp. was also efficient in stimulating the production of total intestinal and serum IgA and IgG. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Enterobacteriaceae, and Enterococci. Supplementation of S. cerevisiae fermentation product increased CD3+, CD4+, and CD8+ T-lymphocyte counts and the ratio CD4+:CD8+ in the blood and spleen as well as ileum intraepithelial lymphocyte count, caecal tonsil secretory IgA counts, serum lysozyme content, and albumin:globulin ratio. Gene expression levels of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-II, CD40, CD80 and CD86 up-regulated in stimulated groups with S. boulardii. Furthermore, toll-like receptors TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, and chicken specific TLR15 expressions were improved. Downstream associated factors of myeloid differentiation (MyD)88, TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), TGF- activated kinase 1 (TAK1), and NF- mRNA levels increased in all treatment groups as compared to the control groups; IL-1b, IL-17, IL-4, TGF-, and IL-10 production levels were higher. Lower concentrationof INF- and IL-8 were observed in S. boulardii. Supplementing the Lactobacillus cultures, singly or in a mixture, in the diet of broilers significantly increased the body weight and feed:gain ratio of broilers significantly decreased the number of coliforms in the cecum 10 and 20 days after feeding. Lactobacillus also significantly increased the total VFA in the ileum and cecum and lowered the caecal pH values. The DFM birds showed increased goblet cell (GC) numbers, total GC area, GC mean size, mucosal thickness, and an increased number of segmented filamentous bacteria compared with controls. Also, the level of MUC2 mRNA in both the jejunum and ileum were increased. Increments in VH and villus height: crypt depth (VH:CD) ratio was directly correlated with enhanced epithelial cell turnover. This could mean that the increments of VH observed with DFM treatment were associated with increased enterocyte turnover rates. Increments in VH and CD of the DFM-treated poults could improve the absorptive surface area in the GI tract of these poults, potentially leading to improved performance. Supplementation of Lactobacillus recruits a gut environment favourable for the colonisation and growth of certain groups of lactobacilli, inducing a beneficial microbiota. Lactobacillus spp. has an immunoregulatory effect of dietary probiotic on the local immune system in broiler chickens. Birds with Lactobacillus diet showed an increase in IEL expressing the surface markers CD3, CD4, CD8, and -TCR. The duodenum, followed by the jejunum, were the segments in which the immune response by T, CD3+, CD4+, and CD8+ cells was stimulated with the strongest intensity. The strains of Lactobacillus spp. were efficient in stimulating the production of total intestinal and serum IgA and IgG. The expression of STAT2, STAT4, IL-18, MyD88, IFN-, and IFN- genes were up-regulated in caecal tonsil cells after treatment with Lactobacillus DNA, suggesting development of a Th1 phenotype. L. acidophilus, L. reuteri and L. salivarius induced significantly more IL-1 expression in spleen cells than in caecal tonsil cells, indicating a more inflammatory response in the spleen than in caecal tonsils. In www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 62 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s caecal tonsil cells, substantial differences were found among strains in the capacity to induce IL-12p40, IL-10, IL-18, transforming growth factor 4 (TGF-4), and IFN-. L. acidophilus is more effective at inducing T-helper-1 cytokines while L. salivarius induces a more antiinflammatory response. Effects of multistrain probiotics are associated with changes in cytokines expression, such as IL-1, IL-6, IFN-, and IL-10, in the gutassociated lymphoid tissues of the chickens; this correlates with protection against both the viscera invasion and gut colonisation by Salmonella typhimurium. The immunomodulatory action of Lactobacillus is dependent on the characteristics and quantity of the strain involved. Bacillus spp. B. subtilis to broilers could improve growth performance as well as increasing the relative weight of the thymus. Bacillus also improved the gut health and gut integrity by increasing the villus height and villus height to crypt depth ratio. B. subtilis spores in broiler chicken feed may exert beneficial effects by one or more of these mechanisms: (1) oxygen consumptioncreating a more favourable environment for beneficial anaerobic species; (2) competitive exclusion in limiting the colonisation of some pathogenic bacteria, especially E. coli, Salmonella enterica, Clostridium perfringens; (3) enzyme production; (4) enhanced immune response; (5) activation of intestinal function. The increase in diffuse lymphohistiocytic infiltration in the mucosa, and the increased number of solitary lymphoid follicles occurring in the connective tissue layer of the mucosa, paralleled increasing B. subtilis concentrations of the feed. The increase in solitary lymphoid follicles, indicating gradual lymphoblast cell production, is suggestive of increased immunological activity of the mucosa. Dietary supplement with probiotics can potentially alter gut microflora by selectively stimulating the growth of beneficial bacteria while suppressing the growth of pathogenic bacteria. IgA. The effects may be related to activation and maturation of epithelial immune cells, stimulation of heterophil bactericidal mechanisms, and increases in the activity and number of T-cells and B-cells, leading to increased synthesis of immunoglobulins. Cytokine mRNA expression was significantly altered by Bacillus spp. Of interest, dietary DFMs lowered interferon-, IL-1, and CXCLi2 cytokine mRNA expression in chicken. IL-2 and IL-4 are produced by naïve and T-helper 2 cells, respectively, in response to antigenic stimulation; on activation by antigen recognition and stimulation naïve T-cells produce IL-2, which bind to its receptor, initiating proliferation of T-cells that recognise the antigen. Chicken IL-6 is secreted by Tcells and macrophages and acts as both a pro-inflammatory in www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 63 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s association of the production of acute phase proteins and antiinflammatory cytokine. Bacillus spp. downregulated IL-2, IL-4 and IL-6 favouring an anti-inflammatory response in the gut. Bacillus spp. downregulated caecal tonsil IL-2, IL-4, and IL-6, and splenic IL-2 and IL-4 expression. This indicates that Bacillus had both local and systemic immunity effects as well as increased ileal and caecal tonsil expression of TGF-4. The cell surface receptors TLR1, 2, 4, and 15 showed significant upregulation at mRNA levels. In addition, associated factors MyD88, TRAF6, TAK1, and NF- were found to respond to all treatment groups. Bacillus can trigger the MyD88-dependent signalling pathway and activate the immune system by stimulating TLRs and, subsequently, TRAF6 expression up-regulation. Enterococcus spp. E. faecium enhanced weight gain and feed conversion in broilers, efficiently inhibiting the adhesion of E. coli to the intestinal mucus, likely through steric hindrance, altered pH, and increases in villus height in broilers. E. faecium plays a beneficial role in the jejunal morphology. The application of E. faecium reduced colonisation of caeca and minimised translocation of Salmonella into the liver and spleen, which plays an important role in a reduction of the pathogen spread. E. Faecium is thought to influence the dynamics of intestinal mucin production in birds, which is supported by the beneficial effect of E. faecium on chickens infected with S. Enteritidis. These chickens have been shown to have a higher number of peripheral blood cells and an increased frequency of lymphocyte subpopulations in the blood at first sampling. E. faecium also increased the number of IgM+ cells after the administration of S. Enteritidis. The administration of the probiotic strain E. faecium AL41 may cause minor oxidative damage, e.g.intracellular accumulation of short-chain fatty acids produced by the bacteria, thereby inducing increased capacity of antioxidant enzymes. The probiotic strain AL41 can increase phagocytosis and strengthen non-specific immunity. The addition of the probiotic strain E. faecium to the feed of ISA Brown hens reduced leucocyte counts and haematocrit values in blood plasma while erythrocyte counts were increased. The administration of E. faecium strains reduced the levels of spoilage microorganisms, such as E. coli and Pseudomonas, in the digestive tract of turkeys. The feeding of EK13 strain increased the body weight of turkeys. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Bifidobacterium spp. Bifidobacterium spp. was typically used usually as a component of a multristrain of probiotics and other substances. The modes of action described in the literature usually include the mechanisms induced by a mixture of probiotics, prebiotics, and other substances. The Bifidobacteria population in chickens fed a diet containing GOS and B. lactis significantly increased 21-fold in comparison to the control-fed birds. In particular, increasing the dietary concentration of GOS was accompanied by significant increases in bifidobacteria counts. The detectable population of bifidobacteria was also greater in chickens fed the diet containing GOS and bifidobacteria when compared with chickens fed a bifidobacteria-containing ration only. Probiotic administration has been shown to reduce Salmonella colonisation in broilers. The increasing IgA and IgG concentrations in plasma and intestinal tissue with broiler age confirmed the maturation of the immune system of broilers with time post-hatch. Dietary administration of a direct-fed microbial was found to have the potential to reduce numbers of C. perfringens in the GI tract of turkey poults infected with this bacterium. The probiotic product resulted in a beneficial modulation of the caecal microflora, as evidenced by the significant increases in the concentrations of bacteria belonging to Bifidobacterium spp., Lactobacillus spp., and gram (+) cocci in treatments. spp. S. cerevisiae improves growth performance and affects immune functions, Ca and P digestibility, and intestinal mucosal morphology of broilers. Growth performance varied with the levels of yeast supplemented, and immune function could be modified with dietary yeast supplementation. Supplementation of S. cerevisiae fermentation product increased CD3+, CD4+, and CD8+ T-lymphocyte counts and the ratio CD4+:CD8+ in blood and spleen as well as ileum intraepithelial lymphocyte count, caecal tonsil secretory IgA counts, serum lysozyme content, and albumin:globulin ratio. Gene expression levels of MHC-II, CD40, CD80 and CD86 up-regulated in stimulated groups with S. boulardii. Furthermore, toll-like receptors TLR1, TLR2, TLR4, and chicken specific TLR15 expressions were improved, and downstream associated factors MyD88, TRAF6, TAB1, and NF- mRNA levels increased in all treatment groups as compared to control groups. IL-1, IL-17, IL-4, TGF-, and IL-10 production levels were found to be higher, and lower concentration of The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Refs :  7422  4560  8360  8359  4042  4044  4043  9189  6234  5252  10723  10724  10722  3221  10721  10388  2226  3060  2316  11477  4502  12763  8175  235  603  10783 multristrain of probiotics and other substances. The modes of action described in the literature usually include the mechanisms induced by a mixture of probiotics, prebiotics, and other substances. Chickens given probiotics (S. faecium + L. acidophilus) showed a reduction in the frequency of C. jejuni shedding in colonised chicks and a reduction in jejunal colonisation in colonised chicks. Greater villus height was obtained in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum with the use of probiotics and prebiotics, and greater crypt depth was obtained with the use of probiotics. Administration of probiotic mixtures containing Lactobacilli, Bifidobacteria, and Enterococci to broiler chicks resulted in a larger quantity of mucosaladherent bacteria in the small intestine, accompanied by a greater number of ileal goblet cells and a larger mucous layer. When treated with these probiotics, immunised birds mounted a significantly greater antibody response (predominantly of the IgM isotype). Probiotics may enhance the specific antibody response to a thymus-dependent cellular antigen. It is possible that these effects are mediated by cytokines secreted by immune system cells stimulated with probiotic bacteria. In this regard, Th-2 cytokines, such as IL-4 and IL-10, play an important role. Probiotics increased the population of IL-6 cells in the cecum and colon mucosal tissues of chicks. Probiotics (Streptococcus faecalis, Clostridium buthricum, and Bacillus mesentericus) cause an influx of the CD8+ T-cells into the intestinal mucosa, which may enhance intestinal immunity by CD8+ T-cells in young chicks. IL-12 and IFN- expression is associated with probiotic-mediated reduction in intestinal colonisation with Salmonella typhimurium. Lactobacillus + Streptococcus + Saccharomyces stimulate the lysozyme level, complement activity, phagocyte index, and phagocyte count in turkeys. Aspergillus spp. Refs :  11160  8360  8359  10468  10469  6234  10723  10724  10722  2316  11477  4502  5346  8175  235  603 Aspergillus spp. was typically used as a component of a multristrain of probiotics and other substances. The modes of action described in the literature usually include the mechanisms induced by a mixture of probiotics, prebiotics, and other substances. Aspergillus oryzae feeding has an anti-inflammatory action and changes to IFN-, IL-1 and TLR-4 mRNA in immune-related cells of the gut in these chicks; this appears to be similar to the effects in those in the antibiotics fed group. In order to obtain better duodenal morphometry, characterised by higher villi, probiotics containing more than one bacterial culture is required (Bacillus, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, Bifidobacterium and Aspergillus). Greater VH was obtained in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum with the use of probiotics and prebiotics and greater CD with the use of probiotics, in relation to the control group. Birds fed the probiotic (Bacillus, Lactobacillus, Saccharomyces, Aspergillus) diet showed improved overall weight gain and CP retention, higher Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium in the caecum, and reduced Clostridium and coliforms in the caecum. The inclusion of these probiotic mixtures into the diet generally improves the oxidative stress and increases the lymphoid organ weights. Pediococcus spp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s C. butyricum improves growth performance. C. butyricum used as a probiotic can modulate nitrogen metabolism, perfect intestinal morphology, and balance the caecal microflora in broiler chickens. C. butyricum promoted serum IgA, IgG, and IgM. C. butyricum inhibited the growth of caecal pathogenic bacteria, such as E. coli, Salmonella, and C. perfringens, and promoted the growth of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. Dietary C. butyricum induced higher acetic acid, butyric acid, valeric acid, and total short-chain fatty acids in the caecal digesta of broiler chickens. This, in turn, promoted the growth of beneficial bacteria and lowered the pH of caecal digesta, which inhibited the growth of pathogenic bacteria. A probiotic mixture (Streptococcus, Clostridium and Bacillus) increased the population of immunoreactive IL-6 cells in the cecum and colon mucosal tissues of chicks. As IL-6 is a multifunctional cytokine for the immune system, the increased IL-6 secretion may affect the immune functions in the intestinal mucosal tissues. humoral immune response that might be due to lower cortisol concentration or the stabilising of lactic acid-producing bacteria augmenting the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins and enhancing the macrophage phagocytic activity in the intestinal lymphoid tissues. Pro-inflammatory cytokines, particularly IL-6, are responsible for the overexpression of C-reactive protein (CRP) in response to various stimuli. An improvement in body weight gain (BWG) and feed efficiency (FE) in the probiotic mixture groups may be attributed to the total effects of probiotic bacterial action, including improved intestinal absorption, resistance to disease, and promotion of hostbeneficial bacteria. Lactococcus spp. 1 Lactococcus in vitro was capable of increasing heterophil oxidative burst and degranulation. The data suggest that a rapid change in gut microflora significantly increased heterophil function. Propionibacterium is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 67 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The predominantly TLR2 was involved locally and only TLR4 was involved systemically, with the production of both pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines. -glucan (19 studies) had been shown to increase the size of the primary and secondary lymphoid organs in broilers. -Glucan acts as an immunoprotective agent by upregulating the inflammatory response, leading to enhanced protection against intracellular pathogens. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). -Glucan also increases pro-inflamatory response (IL-1, IL-2, IFN-) and stimulates the Gut Associated Lymphoid Tissue (GALT) to secrete more sIgA in order to enhance mucosal immunological function. The percentage of CD4 + , CD8 + , and CD4 + /CD8 + double positive lymphocytes in the intestinal intraepithelial leukocytes was increased in -glucan supplemented chicks. MOS increased BW and improved feed conversion. MOS imparted improved intestinal health benefits over antibiotics, as measured by increased morphological development (villi height and goblet cell number), increased colonisation by beneficial bacteria, and decreased pathogenic bacterial counts. MOS significantly up-regulated the transcription of lysozyme (LYZ), which is involved in mucosal immunity. Lysozyme may act as a first defence against bacteria through its hydrolase activity, which breaks down -1, 4 linkages in the peptidoglycan layer of bacterial cell walls, or through a catalytically independent antimicrobial function. There was a significant association between MOS and several mitochondrial pathways, including oxidative phosphorylation, oxidative stress response, and mitochondrial dysfunction. Oxidative phosphorylation is a pathway that uses energy released by the oxidation of nutrients to produce ATP. Increased expression of these genes suggests that the energy production in the gut cells was increased in birds fed with MOS. Supplementation of MOS in C. perfringens-infected birds resulted in an upregulated ileal TLR2b, and ileal and caecal tonsil TLR4 expression, whereas it downregulated caecal tonsil TLR2b expression, suggesting that MOS is involved in the immunomodulation of both TLR2b and TLR4 pathways in the ileum and caecal tonsil. The cytokine upregulation of ileal IL-12p35 and IFN- in the ileum in MOS treatment implies that MOS supplementation in C. perfringens-challenged chickens supports a proinflammatory effect via T-helper type-1 cell-associated pathways to control early stages of the infection. Plasma immunoglobulins were not affected, but the heterophil: lymphocyte ratio, and basophil levels, was significantly affected by prebiotics. Prebiotics did not affect the percentage of T cell or macrophage phenotypes compared with the control birds. MOS or probiotic supplementation to diets of turkey may elevate IgG and IgM levels but reduce the blood T-lymphocyte ratio in turkeys. In addition, compared with MOS, probiotics are more effective in turkeys with regard to inducing humoral immunity. MOS or probiotics may help to reduce the pro-inflammatory response and associated depression in feed intake and growth. MOS alters the bacterial community structure in the turkey caecum. MOS fed to turkeys significantly altered susceptibility of the colonic epithelium to bacterial binding, leading to an altered composition in the enteric microflora closely adjacent to the intestine. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s Supplementation of YCW significantly improved daily weight gain (DWG) during the beginning, ending and overall periods compared with the control birds, but had no effects on feed conversion ratio. Hydrolysed yeast and YCW increased the height and width of the villi in the jejunum, where maximum absorption of nutrients takes place. Longer villi indicate more mature epithelia and enhanced absorptive function due to increased surface area of the villus. It is possible that increased mucin secretion from the goblet cells under the influence of the hydrolysed yeast and the YCW supplementation, coupled with the intrinsic properties of the yeast cell wall mannans binding to bacteria, decreased the number of free bacteria in the lumen and increased their counts on the mucosa. YCW may enhance the cell-mediated immune response in broiler chickens by modulating the production of cytokines. IL-1 and IL-6 expressions were significantly enhanced in the spleen of YCW-fed birds, suggesting that YCW might act as an immunoprotective agent by up-regulating the inflammatory response leading to enhanced protection against pathogens. Supplementation of broiler diets with yeast-derived macromolecules (YDM) resulted in both local and systemic immune responses where TLR2 was primarily involved locally, whereas only TLR4 was involved systemically with the production of both pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines. The TLR-21 was not observed to be a major receptor involved as a result of YDM supplementation. Supplementation of YDM supports both a pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokine effect via Th1 and Th2 cell-associated pathways, both locally and systemically, with expressions of IL-2, IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, IFN-, TGF-4, IL-10, IL-4, and CD40 locally and IL-12p35, IFN-, TGF-β4, and IL-4 systemically. Supplementation of whole yeast cell products, in the absence of any pathogen challenge, increases the IL-10 mRNA amount and Treg population in the caecal tonsils of birds. In the absence of infection, higher IL-10 production and Treg numbers in the gut will facilitate immune tolerance. In the presence of pathogenic bacteria, an inflammatory response mediated by Th17 cells predominates and Tregs lose their suppressive properties and IL-10 production. Supplementing the whole yeast cell wall product decreased coccidial infection, induced increase in E. coli and Salmonella colonisation and improved IFN- mRNA concentration post-coccidial infection. Cell-mediated immune responses are thought to be the most important factors for protection against coccidiosis. CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells populations limit coccidial replication in the intestinal tract. It is possible to hypothesise that the reduction in Eimeria spp. replication in the intestine was caused by the YCW-induction of T-cell responses. Refs :  5815  12935  9047  1798  2130  2131  3974  12876  8936 Supplementation of -glucan did not affect growth performance or blood profiles. -glucan had been shown to increase the size of the primary and secondary lymphoid organs in broilers. -glucan may enhance some cellmediated immune responses of chickens by modulating macrophage ability. β-glucans modulate cytokine profiles, resulting in an enhanced innate and Th1-mediated immune response during an Eimeria infection. -Glucan acts as an immunoprotective agent by upregulating the inflammatory response, leading to enhanced protection against intracellular pathogens. -glucan exposure increased nitrite and IL-1 production as well as inducing macrophage to proliferate in culture. However, IL-6 production was unaffected. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 70 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author (s).   1743  1861  3002  2897  9392  9393  154  8935  7688  7893 IL-1, IL-2, IFN- and TNF- may act as signal-messengers in the immunoregulating network. Levels of these molecules changed according to dosage, corresponding to the levels of -1,3/1,6-glucan supplementation. As a result of these changes in concentration, the signal that is transferred to the effecting molecule-immunoglobulins, or to the immuno-organs and tissues, is also altered. -1,3/1,6-glucan acted as both a stimulating and effecting molecule in the regulatory cycle of the macrophage. The levels of IFN- and IL-2 may also be actively influenced by feedback from the macrophages. -1,3/1,6-glucan stimulates the gut associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) to secrete more sIgA in order to enhance mucosal immunological function. The binding of -glucan to the receptor may cause macrophage, lymphocyte or other blood cells to secrete greater quantities of lower signal molecules. Accordingly, sIgA production might be enhanced in this manner and secreted by the intestinal macrophages and lamina propria lymphocytes. Intestinal sIgA secretion can also be determined by measuring the levels of the cytokines, IL-2, and IFN-. Dietary -glucan supplementation increased the macrophage phagocytic activity, anti-sheep red blood cells antibody response post-boost, and the Phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-P-mediated lymphoproliferative response measured as a toe-web swelling. The percentage of CD4+, CD8+, and CD4+/CD8+ double positive lymphocytes in the intestinal intraepithelial leukocytes was increased in -glucan supplemented chicks. The primary and secondary lymphoid organs, such as the bursa of Fabricius, thymus and spleen, were larger in -glucan-supplemented chicks as compared to the chicks fed the basal diet. Dietary chicory rich in inulin content can exert beneficial effects on the gastrointestinal tract of broiler chickens as a result of alteration in intestinal architecture and absorption of nutrients. Chicory supplementation seems to influence transport properties of intestinal epithelium. Inulin supplementation significantly increased WBCs and feed conversion ratio (FCR) at the end of grower and finisher periods. Heterophils and H:L ratios were significantly increased but lymphocytes decreased at 42 d of age, when the diets were supplemented with inulin. Addition of inulin to the diet may inhibit the nutritional stress or any stress which causes an increase in lymphocytes ratio because the stress can stimulate the adrenal gland to produce hormones such as estrones, which have a direct effect on lymphatic cells. Inulin seems to have neither a direct nor indirect effect on the blood total protein, albumin, or globulin. The mechanism by which polysaccharides, such as inulin or alginate, impact immunity still require further investigation. It is possible that they directly interact with the macrophages and dendritic cells underlying the gut mucosa, activating the NF- pathway through the macrophage receptors (toll-like receptors). Prebiotic FOS-inulin improved the ability of HD11 cells to clear Salmonella Enteritidis by preventing IL-1-associated macrophage cell death. Prebiotic treatment did not influence the nitric oxide (NO) production, thus suggesting that the FOS-inulin-mediated bacterial clearance was not www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 71 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Dietary supplementation of chitooligosaccharide appeared to improve the immunity of broilers by promoting the weight of the main immune organs, increasing immunoglobulin M (IgM) secretion, and stimulating macrophages to release TNF-, IL-1, IL-6, and IFN- and activating inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) to induce NO. CNP-Cu (chitosan nanopaticle + copper) increased the average daily gain and the contents of IgA, IgG, IgM, complement C3, and complement C4. Thymus, spleen, the bursa of Fabricius indices and the populations of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium in caecal digesta were increased. The increase in serum levels of IgA, IgM, and IgG in response to dietary COS supplementation results from a change in the cytokine-mediated microenvironment. IL-6 induces the final maturation of B-cells into immunoglobulin-secreting plasma cells. Chitosan enhanced IL-6 expression in peripheral mononuclear cells. 3 Refs: 735 12661 12894 Dietary supplementation of yeast autolysate was an effective feed additive in broiler feeding because of increased growth performance, increased immunocompetence, and the reduction of E. coli colonisation in the intestine. The use of heat-killed M. phlei played a beneficial role as an immunostimulant against caecal coccidiosis in broiler chickens (high body weight gain, reduction of caecal lesion score produced by E. Tenella, and increase in IgA concentration). Heat-inactivated Lactobacillus salivarius, Clostridium butyricum, Bacillus subtilis mixture could enhance the immune system (increasing antibody titers).  The upregulation of BLB-1, BF-2, IRF-1, IRF-7, TNFSF15, and TLR3 expression were observed, along with the significant upregulation of several genes involved in immune response and host defence; this suggest that mannobiose (MNB) administration may exert a combination effect on the modulation of the intestinal immune system. An increased production www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 72 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). of IgA was also observed. The systematic review reported 109 studies of plant extracts in poultry. Most of these explored Thymus vulgaris derivatives (nine studies), Allium derivatives (six studies), carvacrol (six studies), Curcuma longa derivatives (six studies), Astragalus derivatives (five studies), Origanum derivatives (five studies), and other minor groups (Table 18) . A large number of substances appeared in less than three papers. In chickens, thyme oil (nine studies) makes the intestinal barrier stronger against toxic feedderived substances or endogenously produced toxic metabolites, thus impeding their absorption into the organism. Thyme oil also influences the various antioxidant parameters, but the exact mechanism is unclear. Garlic (6 studies) increases the relative weight of immune organs in chickens, which causes enhanced lymphocyte proliferation and white blood cell (WBC) counts. Additionally, garlic has potential antioxidative and antimicrobial properties. Supplementation of diets with carvacrol (six studies) can improve intestinal morphology (villus length and villus height:crypt depth ratio (VH:CD)) as well as cellular and humoral immune response. Carvacrol can also reduce lipid oxidation in broiler meat. Chickens fed with Curcuma longa (six studies) showed an increased humoral and cellmediated immune response. C. longa induces an anti-inflammatory response, which ameliorates the inflammation produced by infection caused by Eimeria. Thyme oil makes the intestinal barrier stronger against toxic feed-derived substances or endogenously produced toxic metabolites, thus impeding their absorption into the organism. A thiol redox system is very important in this and consists of the glutathione as well as of thioredoxin system. Thyme oil reduced the level of DNA damage induced by hydrogen www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 73 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author (s).   4502  9394  4173  8571  8572  8814 peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), which is associated with its antioxidant activity. The exact mechanism by which thyme oil influences the various antioxidant parameters is currently unclear. It is possible that the antioxidant properties of thyme oil are being utilised by the cells, thus sparing the intracellular antioxidant systems. It can only be speculated that the different terpene compounds in the oil can modify Kerlch-like ECHassociating protein 1 (Keap 1) at sensor -SH groups through chemical reactions. An increase in IgA concentration in the duodenal mucosa likely reflects the active synthesis of antibodies by the chickens' own immune system. Although the mechanism by which dietary additives can enhance the immune response has not been resolved, several reports have demonstrated the activation of toll-like receptors, luminal captation by dendritic cells, or the stimulation of epithelial cells and the release of proinflammatory cytokines. Garlic had a direct stimulatory effect on immune cells. The increases in the relative weights of the spleen and thymus of garlic-treated chickens are likely attributed to the enhanced lymphocyte proliferation and the increase in WBC counts. The increase of the spleen, thymus and bursa weight might be understood as connected to the increase in the CD4-CD8-cell ratios. The antioxidative activity of garlic might have protected mature and/or immature lymphocytes from oxidative stress. Additionally, garlic has potential broad antimicrobial activities. In broiler meat, feed supplement with carvacrol was found to delay lipid oxidation after five and ten days of storage. Carvacrol inhibited the linoleic acid peroxidation by down-regulating the expression of oxidative stress markers, such as cytochrome (CYP)1A1. In these articles, carvacol is primarily used as part of a mixture of essential oils. Therefore, its mode of action on the immune system could not be individually described. The supplementation of diets with these essential oils improved pathological signs (increase in villus length and VH:CD) and increased the cellular and humoral immune responses which could explain the improvement of performance. Curcuma longa derivatives Chickens fed with C. longa showed an increased humoral immune response, as measured by higher serum anti-EtMIC2 antibody. Birds fed the C. longa also showed greater cell-mediated immunity, as demonstrated by enhanced spleen cell proliferation response to Con A compared with the non-supplemented diets. Because invasion and intracellular development stages of Eimeria parasites in the gut are associated with the induction of local inflammatory response, stimulation of anti-inflammatory response by dietary C. longa would lead to decreased gut damage. It is tempting to speculate that this dual mode of action of C. longa may serve not only to limit Eimeria pathogenicity in vivo but also to minimise bystander inflammatory damage to host tissues. In healthy birds, there were no significant differences in the gizzard, heart, spleen, thymus gland, and bursa of Fabricius relative weight (% BW) by the dietary inclusion of Curcuma longa. However, serum globulin concentrations were significantly higher, suggesting that dietary inclusion of curcuma improved the health status of broilers. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). :  6525  1164  522  1161  1165 inconclusive with regard to bird performance. The downregulation of Lipopolysaccharide-Induced TNF Factor (LITAF), IFN-, TLR-4 and IL-10 genes by Orego-Stim suggests that it exerted an anti-inflammatory effect on the birds. Additionally, supplementation with essential oils from oregano increases jejunal villus height, which improves the mucosal membrane. Diets supplemented with black seed improved antibody-mediated immunity, increased red blood cell count, haemoglobin concentration and haematocrit percentage. The desirable influence of black seed on haematology can be attributed to the presence of highly active components, particularly thymoquinone and thymohydoquinone, which possess strong antioxidant activities and increase RBC count. Echinacea extract supplementation for layer chicks appears not to benefit growth performance and intestinal histology during the growth period. Echinacea juice has immune stimulating effects in layers. It seems that the repeated 2 day-trickle stimulation is sufficient to increase immune response. Soybean peptides could increase the density of iIEL and IgA-forming cells in the broiler's intestine. The relative spleen weight in the fermented soybean group was significantly higher than in the control group. Other Chinese herbs 2 Refs: 6279 12887 DBT (Dangguibuxue Tang) markedly induced the production of IL-2 and IL-6. DBT not only significantly decreased feed:gain ratios and mortality but also enhanced cellular modulator immune and humoral immune responses in immune-suppressive chicks. Dietary supplementation with FSE (Forsythia suspense), BE (berberine), or both can improve growth performance under high stocking density conditions, potentially by increasing the ability of free radical scavenging, reducing oxidative stress, and increasing bursa weight and intestinal levels of healthy microbiota. Some reports indicate that sugar cane extract (SCE) has growthpromoting, immunostimulating, anti-stress effects and antioxidant activity. Increased recovery of the BW, villi, and cells were observed in the SCE groups when compared with the control group. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s Cumin seed does not significantly affect performance and relative organ weight, but its addition to feed may influence white blood cells differentiation. Refs: 12920 12918 Supplementation of Aspergillus niger-fermented-Ginkgo biloba leaves (FG), in the starter and grower diets respectively, improved feed efficiency, intestinal morphology, digestion, and the absorption function of broilers. The FG supplementation reduced IFN- expression levels in LPSchallenged birds. The downregulation of both cytokines IL-4 and IL-13 may be part of a homeostatic mechanism of flavonoids and polysaccharides of FG for the maintenance of Th1/Th2 balance in response to extracellular pathogens. Dietary FG was favourable for chickens, especially in the presence of stress, which can be partially ascribed to the immunomodulatory effect of flavonoids and polysaccharides of FG on maintaining Th1/Th2 balance in response to extracellular pathogens. Laurus nobillis is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. The height of the jejunal and ileal villi was greater in the yucca extract group. Yucca extract supplementation for layer chicks is beneficial for growth performance and intestinal histology during the 1-60 d growing period. Achyranthes derivatives 1 Achyranthan polysaccharides increased splenocyte proliferation, NO, and The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). IL-2 production in a dose-dependent manner in vitro. Feeding Achyranthan polysaccharides significantly increased microhaemagglutination inhibition antibody titers, bursa of Fabricius index, serum albumin, serum calcium, and nitric oxide (NO) concentrations. Glycyrrhiza 1 The addition of liquorice extract to broiler diets may reduce abdominal fat content, serum cholesterol, and low density lipoproteins (LDL) concentrations as compared to the control group. Dietary liquorice extract supplementation did not have any negative effects on the body weight or FCR of broiler chickens. Raftifeed (inulin from chicory root) increased the number of Lactobacilli in the ileum and caused reduction in coliform counts in the ileal and caecal digesta. Citrus by product 1 Citrus peel oil is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Zingiber officinale 1 Ginger oil is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. The addition of pitamin to the diet of broiler chickens increased the growth of Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus species, reduced the numbers of Escherichia coli and Salmonella among caecal microorganisms, and improved the growth of the cells of major immune organs, including the spleen, the thymus, and the bursa of Fabricius; it also boosted the immunoglobulin IgG content. Propolis is adequate to enhance the productive performance of broiler chickens. Dietary tannins not only affect the proper performance of the chickens, due to their anti-nutritional characteristics, but may also reduce the efficacy of anti-coccidial vaccines. In alfalfa molt diets, the concentrations of lactic acid were greater than they were in the control group. Zea mays 1 The proportion of CD3+CD4+ lymphocytes of intestinal mucosal lymphocytes (IMLs) in chickens fed fish-oil diets on 21 d and 42 d of age was significantly higher than those in chickens fed corn oil. The proportion of intestinal CD3+CD8+ lymphocytes of chickens fed fish oil diets was significantly lower than those of chickens fed corn oil. Fish oil consumption enhanced IL-2 secretion of IMLs, but corn oil consumption decreased IL-2 secretion. Corn oil increased the mRNA abundance of cGRP, cAMP level and adenylyl cyclise bioactivity. Increased splenic lymphocyte proliferation, in addition to increased percentages of CD4+ T cells and decreased CD8+ cells, was observed in animals fed a safflower-supplemented diet. IFN-, IL-8, IL-15 and IL-17 transcripts in the safflower-supplemented group were higher than they were in the non-supplemented controls. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 77 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 1 Purple sweet potato increased antibodies against vaccines and augmented the proliferations of splenocytes and thymocytes. Camellia sinensis 1 Camellia increased gizzard and proventriculus pH, villi length, and crypt depth but decreased primary antibody response, total white blood cell count, and cholesterol concentration. Mentha piperita 1 Peppermint essential oil increased duodenal crypt depth. This study illustrated that Peppermint oil could not be suggested as an effective alternative for antibiotics. Panax ginseng 1 Red ginseng extract administration improved the lymphocyte level while exerting no influence on RBC or WBC. 1 Rubus coreanus is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. 1 The villi height of duodenum and jejunum in the medicinal plant treated groups was improved. Immune response was significantly higher. Supplementation of plant extract (Sangrovit®) to broiler feed may reduce the incidence of Campylobacter infection in these birds. Achillea 1 The administration of yarrow can reduce the levels of serum lipids and can boost the secondary immune response in broilers. Moreover, its administrationled to a reduced pathogenic bacteria population in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT), which could help improve intestinal health The data indicated that Con A binds to the cells of the gastrointestinal tract, passes into the general circulation and, eventually, elicits an immunological response without affecting the production of antibodies to Brucella Abortus. 1 Myrtus communis is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Foeniculum vulgare 1 Foeniculum vulgare is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with other essential oils. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Gossypium 1 In solid-state fermented cottonseed meal group, the concentration of serum immunoglobin M, as well as the content of complements (C3, C4), was greater than those in the control group. Isoflavones 1 Genistein and hesperidin have the potential to improve immunity, and these also develop the morphometric structures of the small intestine in a dose-dependent manner. Moreover, both compounds were found to be effective in attenuating LPS-induced deterioration of intestinal architecture. Cocos nucifera 1 Mannanase-hydrolysed copra meal might be effective for activating www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 78 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). intestinal absorptive function, and this functional activation promotes the growth of the chickens. Silybum marianum Oral administration of EFO (epimedium polysaccharide (EP)-propolis flavonoid (PF) oral liquid) to chickens that had received the Newcastle Disease vaccine significantly promoted secretion of sIgA and IL-17 from the duodenum and the jejunum and increased the numbers of IELs in the duodenum mucosa and IgA+ cells in the jejunum mucosa and the cecum tonsil. Houttuynia cordata 1 Houttuyna cordata is supplemented in poultry diets as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Acacia derivatives 1 Supplementation with water-soluble carbohydrates from Acacia senegal was not effective in controlling necrotic enteritis (NE). Feeding of Acacia extract caused reduction in coliform counts in the ileal and caecal digesta. The Lactobacillus count in the same group was significantly higher. Arthropodium cirratum 1 Supplementation with water-soluble carbohydrates from lili extract was not effective in controlling NE. Feeding of lili extract caused reduction in coliform counts in the ileal and caecal digesta. The Lactobacillus count in the same group was significantly higher. 1 Yerba mate promoted antimicrobial activity against foodborne pathogens and enhanced the growth of LAB in vitro, but in vivo yerba mate did not decrease Salmonella Enteritidis colonisation. There were a few studies on animal by-product substances (10 studies), such as lactoferrin (3 studies)) ( Table 19 ). Chickens fed lactoferrin showed an increase in serum IgA and IgG as well as enhanced expression of IFN- and IL-12 in T-lymphocytes. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Squid Ink: Squid ink could improve growth performance, antioxidant ability, and immune function (relative weight of immune organs) in growing broiler chickens. The inclusion of enzymes in conventional or alternative diets reduced the number of CD3 in the mucosa of the ileum. The use of alternative plant feed-stuffs in broiler diets promoted an increase in intestinal lesions and enhanced cellular immune response. The undesirable gut health condition can be mitigated using a multi-enzyme complex. Refs: 3520 4633 4632 pLF (porcine lactoferrin) led to a significant increase in serum IgA, IgG and IBD specific antibody titers. pLF administration enhanced the expression of IFN- and IL-12 in chicken T lymphocytes, and pLF enhances cell mediated immunity and augments the ability of IBD vaccination to strengthen subsequent anti-viral response. Refs: 12598 3433 The proportion of CD3+ CD4+ lymphocytes of intestinal mucosal lymphocytes (IMLs) in chickens fed fish oil diets was significantly higher than those in chickens fed corn oil and poultry oil diets. The proportion of intestinal CD3+CD8+ lymphocytes of chickens fed fish oil diets was significantly lower than those of chickens fed corn oil and poultry oil diets.  Dietary administration of sIgY has the potential to reduce the concentration of sIgA via inhibition of intestinal bacterial proliferation in challenged birds and may also reduce serum IgA concentration as a sIgA-dependent variable. Dietary administration of sIgY could reduce this parameter by direct depression of local pathogens as well as indirectly decreasing inflammatory reactions induced by serum IgA. The reduction of lamina propria lymphatic follicle proliferation, in addition to local effects of sIgY on mucosal surfaces, might be due to the fact that IgY can be taken up by pinocytosis from the intestinal lumen and subsequently transported into the lamina propria and then passed into the lymph fluid without inducing an inflammatory response. The systematic review reported 106 studies of other substances / agents in poultry. Most of these concerned organic acids derivatives / fatty acids (31 studies), vitamins (13 studies), minerals (12 studies), amino acids and derivatives (12 studies), fungi / mushroom (10 studies), enzymes (nine studies) and other minor groups (Table 20) . Each group of substances /agents includes several products, each with different modes of action. Due to the complexity of the data, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described within this report. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 80 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Butiric acid (BA) reduced villus length and increased microvillus and crypt depth. Dietary BA inclusion did not affect the counts of lymphocytes, heterophils, monocytes, basophils and eosinophils. Butyric acid reduces virulence gene expression and invasiveness in S. enteritidis; it also decreases in invasion and has been proposed to lead to decreased caecal colonisation. Prebiotic, butyric acid glycerides, and probiotics or their combination with prebiotics or butyric acid glycerides enhance the resistance of birds and partially protect against Coccidiosis. The effects of the different SCFA on colonisation with Salmonella can be explained by the alteration of Salmonella virulence gene expression and invasion of epithelial cells after contact with the respective SCFA. Contact of the bacteria with propionic and butyric acids resulted in a decrease in invasion. Chickens infected with C. perfringens, and treated with the combination of sodium butyrate and essential oils, showed significantly better BW gain, increased villus length and villus length: crypt depth ratio as well as decreased gross pathological and histopathological lesion scores compared with the control group. A combination of Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) agonists and butyrate (or butyrate analogues) with a strong capacity to induce host defence peptide (HDP) synthesis may have the potential to augment animal innate immunity. CLA (conjugated linoleic acid) alleviated the immunosuppression of T-lymphocytes in broiler chickens exposed to cyclosporin A through increasing the peripheral blood Tlymphocyte proliferation and IL-2. The 2 CLA isomers enhanced T-lymphocyte proliferation at low concentrations and inhibited T-lymphocyte proliferation at high concentrations. At a cellular level, the effects of CLA on the alleviation of immunosuppression in T-lymphocytes are mainly attributable to increasing the signalling molecules, such as phospholipase C and protein kinase C. Feeding low dietary ratios of linoleic to linoleic acid to newly hatched chicks modified fatty acid composition of immune tissues, resulting in an increase in antibody production against standard vaccines. The proliferation of lymphocytes depends on the production of IL-2. One may speculate that the effects of dietary alpha-linoleic acid (LNA) on lymphocyte stimulation is caused by the increased competition of n-3 and n-6 PUFA for the binding sites of cyclooxygenase to produce Prostaglandin E2(PGE2). Phenyllactic acid (PLA) depressed FI and BWG during the first 7 d, but growth performance improved after 21 d. White blood cell, lymphocyte concentration, red blood cell, total protein, and albumin concentrations were higher in the PLA group. An improvement of immune status was detected by densely populated immunocompetent cells in the lamina propria and submucosa of caecal tonsils and ileum and also in the cortex and medulla of bursa follicles in citric acid-supplemented chicks. Combined probiotics (a blend of Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei, Streptococcus faecium, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and organic acid (a blend of ascorbic and citric acids) supplementation resulted in variable responses of intestinal histomorphology showing increased goblet cell numbers in the ileum of birds treated. The presence of organic acids could enhance pro-inflammatory response. The enhancements in feed conversion ratio due to the use of acetic acid at different concentrations could be attributed to the antimicrobial and buffering capacity of acetic acid. It was found that broilers fed phytase + commercial mixture of organic acids had higher levels of IgG in the primary immune response, and higher total Ig and IgG in the secondary response compared with all other groups, suggesting an additive effect of phytase and organic acid on the immune response to SRBC. When chickens fed a diet deficient in P and supplemented with this blend, the VH, the CD, and the VH/CD ratio were restored. Supplementation with an encapsulated organic acid blend changed the microbial activity in the ileum and caeca to some extent, however without a gross change in the caecal bacterial community structure. Dietary supplementation with 5-aminolevulinic acid (5-ALA) provides mild oxidative stress and enhances the expression of regulatory factors involved in the immune response, resulting in protection from disease and accompanied by a reduction in growth www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 81 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). performance. Dietary 5-ALA supplementation increases the plasma TBARS concentration and the expression levels of splenic CD3 mRNA in a dose-dependent manner. This implies that dietary 5-ALA supplementation induces oxidative stress and enhances the T-cell system in chickens. In chicken HD11 macrophages and primary monocytes, induction of HDPs (host defence peptides) is largely in an inverse correlation with the aliphatic hydrocarbon chain length of free fatty acids, with SCFAs being the most potent, medium-chain fatty acids moderate and long-chain fatty acids marginal. Additionally, three SCFAs, namely acetate, propionate, and butyrate, exerted a strong synergy in augmenting HDP gene expression in chicken cells. The goblet cell numbers in formic and propionic acid group was significantly increased in all intestinal segments compared to the other groups. Organic acid combination may probably promote the effects of probiotic-prebiotic combination. Refs :  5815  13087  9546  8936  7489  8119  8921  1881  8935  8174  7519  7520  12998 The combination of high levels of Arg and higher-than-industry levels supplementation of vitamin E have an important immunomodulation effect on the cell-and humoralmediated immune response of broiler chickens by increasing the amount of T-and B-cells and the CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocyte subpopulations. The supplementation of -tocopherol significantly enhanced the capacity of macrophages to engulf unopsonized SRBC. These macrophages can effectively perform their function by binding, internalizing and degrading foreign particles by lysosomal acid hydrolysis. The enhanced engulfment may be due to potential effects of -tocopherol on receptors located on the cell membrane for different functions and are Fc portion of immunoglobulins. The increase in the mutagenic activity of T-lymphocytes can be enhanced further by the supplementation of -tocopherol and has a positive effect on the cell-mediated part of immune response. Vitamin E induces an increase of IgA in the circulation and at the local intestinal site. Both vitamins E and C improved antibody responses to inoculated sheep red blood cells (SRBC) and Newcastle disease virus (NDV) vaccine, lymphocyte proliferation in response to mitogen and activities of antioxidant enzymes red blood cell catalase (RBCC) and glutathione peroxidase (GSH-PX) in layers. Dietary vitamin E was associated with elevation of CD4+, CD8+, as well as CD4+ CD8+ T lymphocytes in Listeria-infected turkeys, when compared with infected turkeys on control diets. Splenic expression of IL-6 was higher in Leghorns fed the basal or ascorbic acid diets, rather than the -glucan diet, whereas the opposite relationship was observed in the Fayoumi line. The lack of a significant diet effect on IFN- supports an increase in T-helper cell number rather than an augmentation of the T-cell-mediated immune response. The addition of immune-enhancing substances to chicken diets may have different effects due to the genetic backgrounds of the lines. When breeders received a high mix (retinol (vitamin A), tocopherol (vitamin E), ascorbic acid (vitamin C), thiamine (vitamin B1), riboflavin (vitamin B2), zinc, copper and selenium) the number of infiltrating polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the intestine was higher compared with those of breeders receiving basal amounts of minerals and vitamins. Additionally, the recovery rate of intestinal lesions, cystic crypts, and villus atrophy, as observed by histopathology, was faster in the groups in which the breeders received high mix. Supplemental 25-OH-D3 (hydroxylation of vitamin D) had no apparent effect on growth performance. However, it resulted in lighter relative weight, longer villus length, and shorter crypt depth of the small intestine. Dietary Folic Acid (FA) enhanced expression of IL-8 in the spleen; however, there was a downregulation in the expression of IL-8 in the caecal tonsils, indicating a pleiotropic effect of FA in older laying hens under acute LPS challenge. Interleukin-18 and IL-1 are related pro-inflammatory cytokines critical to the initiation of inflammatory responses. The downregulation of IL-1 and IL-18 in the caecal tonsils may partially explain the beneficial anti-inflammatory effects of FA in young laying hens exposed to an acute LPS challenge. This downregulation reduces the likelihood of an immune response to an antigen and serves to control inflammatory responses once the pathogen has been cleared. The balance between Th1 (IFN-) and Th2 (IL-10) inflammatory responses in response to LPS was therefore enhanced. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 82 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Natural Clinoptilolite (NCLI) and modified Clinoptilolite (MCLI) improved the permeability of the intestinal mucosa, reduced the extent of intestinal mucosa damage, and ultimately protected intestinal mucosal barrier function. Pre-treatment with NCLI and MCLI significantly decreased the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines. These data suggested that NCLI and MCLI could decrease the concentrations of TNF-, IL-1 and IL-10. This indicated that NCLI and MCLI could improve the permeability of the intestinal mucosa and played a protective role in the broiler intestinal barrier function. The addition of Zinc-bearing clinoptilolite (ZnCP) to the diet produced a decreasing effect on the Salmonella population, suggesting that ZnCP can regulate the caecal microflora of broilers after Salmonella infection. The protective effects of ZnCP on growth performance, microflora colonies, and serum diamin oxidase (DAO) of broilers infected by Salmonella might attribute to the antibacterial activity and the adsorption of bacteria or toxins onto ZnCP. Therefore, ZnCP could act as an antibacterial agent against Salmonella, inhibiting its growth and improving the gut health. Results indicated that supplementation with ZnCP significantly decreased the relative weight of the spleen. It is likely that ZnCP could adsorb Salmonella bacteria or toxins and inhibit its activity, decreasing the transportation of Salmonella into the spleen and thus reducing the immune reactions against Salmonella and spleen weight. When thyme oil and selenium are administered together, there is an increase in the antioxidative capacity of broiler chickens' tissues. Dietary inorganic chromium (Cr) supplementation as feed additive (2 mg/kg basal diet) has improved the production performance, and potentiated the immune-competence of heat-stressed broiler chickens. The increase in lymphocytes and decrease in heterophils count, with the subsequent reduction of heterophil:lymphocyte ratio of Cr supplemented heat-stressed chickens observed, could be related the Cr-induced reduction in serum cortisol. Vanadium in excess diet reduces the ileac T-cell population, the percentage of T-cell subsets, and the contents of cytokines such as IL-2, IL-6, and IFN- in the ileum. These changes may affect the immune function of local intestinal mucosa in broilers. The ameliorative effects of dietary sodium (Na)-bentonite on the reduced percentage and mean of phagocytosis caused by Aflatoxin could be attributed to the role of Na-bentonite as a sequestering agent against aflatoxin (AF) present in the diet through reducing its bioavailability in the gastrointestinal tract. Amino acids and derivatives Use of L-threonine increased intestinal morphology parameters such as crypt depth, villi height, and width in both the jejunum and ileum segments. However, villi height and width and crypt depth increased in both jejunum and ileum segments when dietary Lthreonine increased. L-threonine increases the concentrations of IgA antibody in the ileum. The addition of Lthreonine in the diet resulted in increased levels of IgG, but no difference was found in the concentration of IgG antibody in the ileum or the jejunum. Expression of jejunal and ileal mucin (MUC)-2 mRNA increased in a linear fashion (P<0.01) by increasing levels of Lthreonine. The combination of high levels of Arg and high supplementation of vitamin E have an important immunomodulation effects on the cell-and humoral-mediated immune response of broiler chickens by increasing the amount of T-and B-cells and the CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocyte subpopulations. Increasing L-Arg level in the diet supports immune response due to the production of NO in healthy broilers. Significant improvements in body weight gain were observed when Gln was supplemented in the feed. The birds fed diets supplemented with Gln had significantly longer intestinal villi than birds in the control group, indicating increased nutrient absorption. Higher IgA concentrations in the serum, bile, and intestines observed in the birds fed diets supplemented with Gln. IgG levels increase in birds fed diet with Gln. The supplementation of Gln in diets fed to chicks significantly promoted the growth of the spleen and thymus. Cysteamine can induce proliferation and differentiation of IgA-positive cells and iIEL in the intestinal mucosa of chickens by reducing the number of somatostatin-positive cells. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s Lysozyme has bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity against many Gram (+) bacteria and only a limited ability to affect Gram (-) bacteria. Enzymatic hydrolysis of lysozyme has been found to enhance its activity by exposing antibacterial portions of the protein and producing antibacerial peptides. Lysozyme reduced E. coli and Lactobacillus counts in the ileal digesta of birds, suggesting that digestive enzymes and other compounds, such as sIgA in the gut, may have induced the novel antimicrobial activity and broadened the spectrum of activity of lysozyme in vivo. In addition, the apparent effect of lysozyme on E. coli and Lactobacillus counts could also be indirect in birds challenged with C. perfringens; this occurs via its inhibitory effect on C. Perfringens colonisation, which can reduce their counts. Phytase addition significantly increased the percentages of erythrocyte rosette-forming cells (ERFC) and erythrocyte-antibody complement cells (EAC), indicating that the proliferations of T-and B-cells were induced by factors that may result from the substantial concentrations of lower inositol phosphates created by dietary phytase. Because the bursa is the source organ for B-cells, the development of the bursa may induce the proliferation of B-cells. Thus, the growth-promoting effect of phytase may be expressed via both nutrient release and a physiological regulation mechanism. The percentages of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells are enhanced by phytase addition, indicating a potential for increased activity of immunocytes. Part of the nutritional improvements associated with phytase may be mediated through improvements in immunocyte activity. Birds fed high-phytate diets returned a lower concentration of sIgA in jejunal mucosa, which may partially result from dilution when mucin is hypersecreted, as stimulated by phytate. The mechanism by which phytate influences mucin integrity is thought to be related to the highly (pH dependent) reactive nature of dietary phytate. When feed is exposed to the low pH conditions in the proximal gut, phytate is solubilised and can react electrostatically with basic amino acid residues in dietary protein. Supplementing diets with phytase restores the VH, CD, and VH:CD when broiler chickens are fed a diet deficient in P. Xylanase increases the relative weight of the spleen, suggesting that enzyme supplement accelerated the development of the immune organ. It increases serum antibody titers to NDV, suggesting that enzyme supplement enhanced humoral response. The enzyme supplementation increased lymphocyte proliferation in response to PHA and NK cell activity significantly, suggesting that the cell-mediated responses were enhanced. The addition of the enzyme likely enhanced the digestion of feed and the absorption of nutrients, which in turn could have an effect on body immunity. Additionally supplementation with xylanase reduces Salmonella after infection. Refs: 5598 5599 12148 5596 5597 Not only did Brevibacillus texasporus (BT) prime the heterophils and monocytes for an increase in transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by inflammatory agonists, but it also up-regulated expression of inflammatory chemokines mRNA. Although BT priming modulated the expression of cytokine mRNA in the leukocytes stimulated by different inflammatory agonists, BT on its own neither directly induced cell functional activity nor gene expression of either the pro-inflammatory cytokines or inflammatory chemokines. Cytokine gene expression in avian heterophils and monocytes can be regulated by the BT peptides to allow the cells to respond to a stimulus in a qualitative manner. BT peptides appear to servea preventive function in the innate immune cells, which can initiate cell migration to the site of infection, and the increased phagocytosis can kill off the invading bacteria. The increased expression of CXCLi1 and CXCLi2 shows that heterophils and monocytes can direct the recruitment of further innate immune cells that lead to the site of infection, increasing the ability of the host to limit the infection. Accordingly, these results imply that both cell types are proficient in amplifying the local acute inflammatory response. Furthermore, the expression of IL-1 and IL-6 in the BTprimed heterophils and monocytes would further lead to enhanced bacterial clearance. BT, as a feed additive, reduces Salmonella enteritidis (SE) caecal colonisation. This www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 84 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The most common substances and agents studied, with regard to their effects on immunity in bovines, were probiotics ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). formal reaction of innate immunity in response to increasing and changing bacterial diversity in the gastrointestinal tract of calves receiving the probiotic. Enterococcus spp. administration (10 studies) during the first weeks following birth increases the healthof calves, making them more resilient to subsequent stressful situations. Oral administration of Enterococcus spp. in calves may have an immunostimulatory effect, promoting earlier recovery of IgA levels in mucosal immunity and enhancing the intestinal mucosal immunity, increasing the number of IELs and reinforcing the intestinal mucosal barrier against infection. Lactic acid bacteria improved BW and FI, increasing the number of LAB and LAB/coliform ratio in rumen, duodenum, and jejunum and decreasing the prevalence of E. coli O157. This effect on E. coli O157 was further supported by a decrease in ileal lamina propria thickness for treated steers, which might indicate that harmful microorganisms capable of causing inflammation were inhibited. L. animalis and L. paracasei subspp. paracasei have indicated an acidification capability due to the production of organic acids (acetic and lactic acid), hydrogen peroxide, and bacteriocins; these antimicrobial-like compounds might be active against some pathogens. L. acidophilus with/without L.plantarum increase of IgG, haemoglobin (Hb), and packed cell volume (PCV) and decrease in cholesterol (CHLO) and total lipids (TLI) concentration. The feed additive increased expression of IL-4R. Enhanced expression of IL-4R has the potential to increase IL-1 production and to enhance cell death. A possible mechanism by which the additive increases neutrophil IL-1 secretion is via IL-4R-dependent activation of ICE. Increased expression of epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor implies that the neutrophils of the treated animals may be more sensitive to EGF signalling and therefore may be more sensitive to TNF. Analysis of genes, which were differentially regulated by the feeding OmniGen-AF, indicated that three generalised changes in neutrophil physiology may be induced, including: i) apoptosis, ii) cell-to-cell communication and iii) sensitivity to extracellular signalling (i.e. via altered expression of cytokine/hormone receptors). Mixtures of probiotics containing Lactobacillus increase the number of CD3+CD45R+ T cells, which may indicate a nonspecific but enhanced immune state. Similar to CD3+ cells, increased numbers of CD4+CD45R+ and CD8+CD45R+ T cells are observed. They may be involved in immune system responses, along with direct or indirect immune-stimulatory effects of the probiotic in the calves. The higher number of Workshop cluster 1 (WC1) + T cells in calves receiving the probiotic was associated with an increased number of CD4+ cells. The increased number of peripheral monocytes expressing TLR2 might be associated with the formal reaction of innate immunity in response to increasing and changing bacterial diversity in the gastrointestinal tract of the calves receiving the probiotic. Increased expression of IL-6, IFN-γ and TNF- in peripheral leukocytes may be dependent on the period after administration and numbers of activated T-lymphocytes or monocytes in the treatment group. Enterococcus spp. Probiotic administration during the first weeks after birth increases the wellness of calves by sustaining their intestinal health and making them more physiologically The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). :  6960  11571  8737  8736  9229  491  12954  2914  3569  4895 resilient in facing subsequently stressful rearing conditions. Probiotic supplementation reduced the faecal count of Clostridia and Enterococci. Oral administration of Enterococcus in calves may have an immunostimulatory effect, promoting the earlier recovery of IgA levels in mucosal immunity, enhancing the intestinal mucosal immunity, increasing the number of IELs, and reinforcing of the intestinal mucosal barrier against infection by the hyperplasia of epithelial goblet cells in the small intestine. Animals fed with the probiotic group also showed a higher number of mast cells. Intestinal mucosal mast cells are important immunocompetent cells in the intestinal mucosal immune response, and they exert multifunctional roles. These results supported the idea that the specific effect on the gut defence mechanisms was that Enterococcus had an intense influence on the number of mucosal immune cells and that increased intestinal mucosal immune cells can enhance the defence system of the body. Therefore, diarrhoea, mortality, and morbidity will be decreased. However, supplementation with E. faecium to feedlot steers under high-grain diet for a period of 11 d had no effects on acute phase proteins measured (i.e., serum amyloid A (SAA), LBP, haptoglobin, and 1-acid glycoprotein (Agp)). Bacillus spp. B. subtilis natto ingestion did not increase IgE antibody levels in the serum, indicating that B. subtilis natto was not a food allergen for the calves. B. subtilis induces the secretion of serum IgG and Th1 cytokine levels, including IFN-, which helps to activate immune systems and enhance immunity. Supplementation of a commercial electrolyte product containing Bacillus to scouring calves led to differences in Agp concentration and leukocyte populations. The Bacillus promoted development of T-cell subpopulations, including the  T-cell, memory, and activated subsets and regulated inflammation during the scouring event as indicated by the monocyte population (CD8-CD25+, CD8-CD45RO+, CD8-TCR1+). Scour treatment containing electrolyte supplemented with Bacillus may provide additional benefits beyond the therapeutic effect, as it may also improve later immune development as evidenced by the enhancement of elements of the innate and adaptive immune systems in calves following the scouring event. Saccharomyces spp. Refs: 5416 6684 2914 7582 Supplementation with Saccharomyces did not affect animal performance or humoral immune response. Some improvements in neutrophil function (neutrophil chemotaxis and respiratory burst activity) were observed with supplemental yeast culture when cells were incubated with pathogenic E. coli. OmniGen-AF® for 60 days prepartum appeared to ameliorate the immunosuppression typically observed during calving. The treated heifers managed the stress associated with parturition better and produced fewer active inflammatory products, hence lower reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. OmniGen-AF® (1) enhanced the function bovine blood leukocytes during the periparturient period, when the innate immune system is typically immunosuppressed and susceptible to new intra-mammary infection (IMI), and (2) Pediococcus is supplemented in bovine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Clostridium spp. Clostridium is supplemented in bovine diets as a mixture with other probiotics and prebiotics (synbiotic). Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Supplementing feedlot cattle diets daily with microbials based on lactic acid-utilising bacteria (Propionibacterium) had no effect on ruminal or blood pH, but other variables measured indicated a decreased risk of acidosis. The prevalence of E. coli strain O157 in the faeces and on the hide was decreased in steers treated with directfed microbial. This effect on E. coli O157 was further supported by a decrease in ileal lamina propria thickness for treated steers, which might indicate that harmful microorganisms capable of causing inflammation were inhibited. Bifidobacterium spp. 2 Bifidobacterium is supplemented in bovine diets as mixtures with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Candida spp. Refs: 5274 9229 Feeding of Candida CO119 significantly increased the number of faecal LAB of Holstein calves, suggesting that the bacteria have a probiotic ability to improve intestinal microbial flora. However, the effect was limited in the early stage of the lactation period. Streptococcus spp. 1 Streptococcus is supplemented in bovine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Aspergillus spp. 1 Aspergillus is supplemented in bovine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Escherichia spp. Refs: 5416 E. coli is supplemented in bovine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. There are several studies on prebiotic (eight studies; Table 22 ), such as MOS (two studies) and glucan (two studies). Due to the small number of articles obtained, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. The highly significant enhancement of IgG level in piglets and calves receiving gut active carbohydrates (GAC) supports the theory that gastric exposure to GAC improves Ig uptake from the gut. Therefore, supplementing neonates with GAC may provide a method for improving immune status and reducing the risk of disease in piglet and calf-rearing operations. Glucan 2 Glucan is supplemented in bovine diets as a mixture with other prebiotics or other substances and agents. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 88 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Yeast cell wall (YCW) 1 The addition of prebiotics to the whole milk of dairy female calves increased ADG and reduced faecal shedding of E. coli, but dry matter intake and blood parameters related to immune system and cell-mediated immune response were unaffected. Inulin 1 Inulin feeding could improve effects on iron absorption capabilities. Inulin was able to increase haemoglobin concentration, haematocrit, and IL-10 expression. Therefore, inulin decreased signs of immune activation and increased anti-inflammatory signals. 1 Feed intake, daily gain, and occurrence of diarrhoea in the calves was unaffected by CE supplementation. CE supplementation seemed to have no effect on the maintenance of the levels of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium species in the large intestine of pre-weaning calves. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)  There area several studies on plant extract (11 studies; Table 23 ), such as Soybean, Allium or Curcuma longa derivatives (two studies for each group). Due to the few articles obtained, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. Feeding fermented soybean meal (FSBM) as calf starter in calves reduced cortisol response and enhanced production of immune-related serum proteins, particularly LPS-specific IgG and IgA, and haptoglobin against LPS challenge. Therefore, FSBM may have beneficial effects on attenuating stress response and enhancing B-cell response partially through the supply of essential amino acids, small peptides, and the enhancement of immune status (humoral response) in weaned calves. Densities of T-lymphocytes were also increased in the jejunal mucosa of calves fed antigenic soya. Increased T-cell densities in the jejunum of calves fed antigenic soya was essentially accounted for by CD8+ cells and WC1+ cells in the epithelium, and CD4+ cells, CD8+ cells and WC1+ cells in the lamina propria. These results suggest the possible implication of a CD8 T-cell-mediated cytotoxicity mechanism at the epithelial level. Proportion of CD4+ cells increased in response to garlic. However, induction of the tumour necrosis factor (TNF), IFN-, and IL-6 with LPS in vitro was not affected. Therefore, garlic might modulate the function of the adaptive immune system. Proportion of CD4+ cells increased in response to curcumin. However, induction of TNF, IFN-, and IL-6 with LPS in vitro was unaffected. Therefore, curcumin might modulate the function of the adaptive immune system. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 89 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Cinnamon derivatives 1 A low dose of cinnamon (CIN) tended to increase organic matter (OM) availability in the rumen due to increased feed intake and greater ruminal digested OM. Increased ruminal OM availability did not, however, increase ruminal microbial protein synthesis. In contrast, feed intake and ruminal digestion of feeds was adversely affected when a high dose of CIN was supplemented. The mode of action of CIN appears to be primarily in the rumen, affecting ruminal digestion with minimal effects on intestinal digestion. Other Chinese herbs 1 The addition of Fructus Ligustri Lucidi (FLL) to diet increased apparent total tract digestibility of the diet's dry and organic matter and increased average daily gain and feed efficiency in dairy heifers. Diets supplemented with FLL improved blood antioxidant status (higher concentrations of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and lower concentrations of malondialdehyde (MDA)) and immunity status for dairy heifers (IL-2 increased and IFN-, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and immunoreactive fibronectin decreased). 1 The proportion of CD4+ cells increased in response to capsicum. When CD4 T-lymphocytes are activated, they produce cytokines that activate cells of the innate immune system, such as macrophages, and stimulate antibody production from B-cells. However, the induction of TNF, IFN-, and IL-6 with LPS in vitro was unaffected. A likely and generally wellaccepted mechanism for the pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidative effect of dietary phenolics is hydrogen peroxide generation (i.e. oxygen reduction) coupled with phenolic oxidation. A second potential mechanism that could explain the absence of an observed antioxidant effect of phytonutrients (PN) in this study, and in the case of 8-isoprostane levels a slight increase in pro-oxidant activity, is the generation of o-quinones from phenolic oxidation. Camellia sinensis 1 Haemoglobin and haemaotcrit values were lower in fermented green tea probiotic (Camellia) and the percentage of monocytes and IGM were higher. It is concluded that fermented green tea probiotic may be a suitable alternative to antibiotics for Hanwoo beef calves. Juniperus communis 1 Supplementation with juniperus improved feed digestibility in the rumen, but possibly at the expense of a reduction in the flow of bypass protein to the small intestine. The total and differential numbers of white blood cells, as well as serum amyloid A and haptoglobin, were unaffected by the treatment, suggesting that the additive had no effect on the immune status of cows. There are several of studies on animal by-products (four studies; Table 24 ), two studies for lactoferrin and two for antibodies. Due to the few articles obtained, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). increasing blood serum immunoglobulin G levels. In addition, the number of peripheral blood leucocytes increased, and mRNA levels of various interleukins such as IL-1, IL-8, IL-10 and IFN- in those cells in response to LF treatment were enhanced. In blood, mRNA expression of the pro-inflammatory marker genes IL-1 and IFN- decreased over the 10-week treatment. Additionally, LF feeding decreased villus sizes in the jejunum. Refs: 5146 3142 IgG absorption by newborn calves is enhanced by adding Se to colostrum. Increased IgG and Se in blood plasma could contribute to improved resistance to infectious diseases in postnatal calves and could reduce the attrition rate. The systematic review reported 20 studies of other substances / agents in bovines. Most of these studies concerned minerals (six studies), lactulose (four studies), vitamins (three studies) and other minor groups (Table 25 ). Almost all groups of substances /agents include several products, each with different modes of action. Due to the complexity of data and the reduced number of articles in each group, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. Biotite (1): enhanced clearance of Bovine herpes virus 1 (BHV-1), a low infection rate of Mannheimia haemolytica serotype A1, tempered superficial lesions, and moderated histopathological signs were observed in the germanium biotite supplemented animals after a challenge. Chromium (2): Supplementation of the rations for dairy cows with chromium affected the regulation rather than the intensity of immune responses. The relative dominance of the specific antibodies of IgG2 isotype is not only a sign of the prevalence of cell-mediated type of immune response (Th1 type) but also of a higher efficiency in the protection against bacterial and some viral and parasitic infections. For cows fed Cr, concentrations IL-2, IFN- and TNF- in the culture supernatants of the mitogen-stimulated mononuclear cells decreased. Illite (1): values of haematological indices, differential leukocyte counts, blood proteins, and immunoglobulin among the additive-fed calves were not significantly different. Serum albumin in post-weaning calves of all feed additive groups were similar but significantly lower (p<0.05) than in the control group. Post-weaning, IgM was significantly lower (p<0.05) in illite-fed calves compared to other treatment groups, but there was no difference pre-weaning. Selenium (1): The addition of Se to colostrum might directly activate this physiological pinocytosis of intestinal epithelial cells because of the rapidity of the reaction. Increased IgG and Se in blood plasma could contribute to improved resistance to infectious diseases in postnatal calves and could reduce the attrition rate. Zinc (1) The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). composition, and S. Pullorum-challenge in the control group; however, both the Zn-AA W and Zn-Pro S were more effective than Zn-Pro M and Zn sulphate in enhancing rumen fermentation, Zn status, and humoral immune response as well as improving the milk yield of lactating cows (Zn chelates with weak (Zn-AA W), moderate (Zn-Pro M), or strong (Zn-Pro S) chelation strengths). The improved milk production might be attributed to improved rumen fermentation, Zn status, and immune function. Addition of soybean Trypsin Inhibitor may be beneficial not only by protecting Ig but also by protecting these nonspecific antimicrobial factors from proteolytic degradation. Difructose Anhydride (DFA) III (1): The MCH was significantly higher in the DFA III group than in the control group. This suggests that DFA III increases Hb production and maintains the MCH within the normal range. Further, supplemental DFA III may accelerate the shift of iron into the Hb in the blood more efficiently in the early stages after calving than in the late stages. Further, the serum iron concentration at 24 h after calving was significantly lower in the DFA III group than in the control group. The increase of IgG indicates the superior immunological status of the calves in the DFA III group at one month after calving, and this finding is consistent with the difference in duration of medical treatment between the groups at two months after calving and at weaning. Monensin (MO) (1): Feeding monensin could be beneficial in terms of increasing bypass protein from the rumen, but it did not improve feed digestion or milk production. Colostrum replacer (1): Calves fed colostrum replacer had a significantly higher rate of daily weight gain and were less likely to be affected with diarrhoea. The effects of lactulose are sex-specific: male calves tended to have higher body weight and female calves tended to have increased changes in intestinal morphology in response to lactulose. Ileal villus height, crypt depth, and the surface area of lymph follicles from Peyer's patches were reduced by lactulose treatment. Some studies found that lactulose feeding significantly stimulated IL-10 production in the jejunum and colon and others showed decreases in IL-10 mRNA expression. IL-10 can inhibit antigen specific proliferation and cytokine secretion by Th1 lymphocytes and has down-regulatory effects on macrophages and dendritic cells, such as suppression of activation and IL-12 production and prevention of interferon- induced disruption of colonic epithelial barriers. High dose lactulose feeding significantly stimulated TGF-1 production in the caecum. TGF-1 regulates proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, and immune regulation. Lactulose has a suppressive effect on the anti-apoptotic marker B-cell lymphomaextra large (Bcl-xl) in the jejunum. The high lactulose feeding has upregulated the apoptotic molecule caspase 3 in the caecum. The enhanced apoptotic rate of caspase 3 seems to be associated with a decrease in crypt depth due to lactulose supplementation. Total leukocyte count was decreased but a significantly greater number of blood lymphocytes were detected in lactulose group. Additional lactulose feeding had an immunomodulatory effect on the composition of T-cell subsets in different immune compartments. The expression results in male calves indicated that the transcription of IgA Fc receptor in the ileal mucosa of lactulose treatment group increased. Decreases in interferon- mRNA expression were observed in the ileum. The CD4presenting lymphocytes were decreased significantly in the ileum and mesenteric lymph node, whereas CD8-presenting lymphocytes were increased in the blood of females. In some studies, these parameters www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 92 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). were not modified. Other pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-8, and TNF-) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (TGF-1) did not show significant differences in mRNA expression across treatments. However, IL-8 was significantly upregulated by lactulose in mesenteric lymph nodes in one of the studies. Expression of the lymphocyte activation marker IL-2 receptor alpha chain (IL2RA) tended to decrease in lactulose-treated animals. Refs: 10190 2860 7582 Vitamin A (1): Increased follicle sizes of Peyer's patches (PP) were seen in vitamin A-supplemented calves, and vitamin A selectively affected the number of T-lymphocytes in domes. Vitamin C (1): Vitamin C is supplemented in bovine diets as mixtures with other substances. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Organic acids derivatives / Fatty acids 1 Butyrate: Exogenous butyrate seemingly had a stimulating effect on the native butyrate-producing bacterial population. This increase was associated with simultaneous reduction in the concentration of both acetate and propionate. Therefore, exogenous butyrate resulted in a significant increase in the relative abundance of Firmicutes, the second most abundant phylum, and a drastic reduction in the most abundant genus, Prevotella. However, the relative abundance of the second most abundant genus, Succiniclasticum, was relatively unchanged.  There are several studies on probiotics in ovine and caprine populations (16 studies; Table   26 ), six studies for Lactobacillus spp. (four for ovine and two for caprine), and three for Saccharomyces spp.. Due to the complexity and the small number of articles obtained, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Lactobacillus spp. Refs: 9998 6178 8752 6204 12393 6812 Ovine (4): Supplementation with Lactobacillus stimulated Lactobacilli proliferation, which reached up to 25% of the total bacteria during wheatinduced lactic acidosis. This induced a large increase in lactate concentration, which decreased ruminal pH. Therefore, Lactobacillus may be effective in stabilising ruminal pH and therefore preventing sub-acute ruminal acidosis (SARA) risk (reduction of the occurrence of butyric and propionic), but they were not effective against lactic acidosis. L. acidophilus also enhanced immune-regulatory functions. Lactic acid bacteria had a protective effect against Transmissible Gastroenteritis Coronavirus (TGEV) and Rotavirus (RV) on animal and human intestinal and macrophage cell lines of non-tumour origin and it reduced the total number of E. coli O157:H7 shed in the faeces and improved animal meat production in lambs previously infected. Caprine (2):L. plantarum led to increased LAB and reduced clostridia faecal counts, underlining a possible beneficial probiotic effect in balancing the goat intestinal microbiota toward potentially beneficial microbes. The reduction in clostridia could also imply a protective effect against clostridial intestinal disorders and diarrhoeas. The antioxidant capacity and the concentrations of immunoglobulins IgA, IgM and IgG in goat plasma did not differ across treatments. The strain showed an interesting potential toward the enrichment of milk in beneficial polyunsaturated fatty acids. Saccharomyces spp. Refs: 6736 8752 12210 Inter Yeast S. stimulates specific and non-specific humoral and cellular immunity in lambs (it stimulated the proliferative activity of T-and B-cells). With regard to humoral immunity parameters, significantly higher gamma globulin levels and higher lysozyme and ceruloplasmin activity were found in the blood serum of experimental lambs that were administered the Inter Yeast S. An analysis of cellular immunity indicators revealed significantly higher levels of respiratory burst activity (RBA) and potential killing activity (PKA) of phagocytes, as well as higher proliferative response of blood lymphocytes after stimulation with LPS and ConA. Enterococcus spp. Refs: 6811 12393 Pre-treatment with E. faecium PCK38, prior to viral challenge, translated into a marked increased in survival percentages as well as a protective effect against monolayer disruption (40% survival, i.e. four times higher than the survival obtained with the virus application). Bacillus spp. Milk yield, fat, and protein content were significantly increased after the addition of probiotics (Bacillus strains). Bifidobacterium spp. 1 Lambs fed milk replacer (MR) containing a mix of Bifidobacteria showed the highest in vivo cellular immune response to phytohemagglutinin. Finally, it is concluded that B. animalis subspp. lactis and B. longum subspp. longum improved humoral response in lambs. Streptococcus spp. 1 Supplementing the diet of lambs infected with E. coli O157:H7 with S. faecium can reduce the total number of E. coli O157:H7 shed in the faeces and can improve animal meat production. Aspergillus spp. Aspergillus is supplemented in caprine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Propionibacterium spp. 1 Propionibacterium probiotic strains may be effective in stabilising ruminal pH and therefore preventing SARA risk, but they were not effective against lactic acidosis.The effectiveness of probiotics is compromised by ruminal fermentations, and they are effective when the ruminal ecosystem is unstable. Probiotics stimulated Lactobacilli proliferation, which reached up to 25% of total bacteria during wheat-induced lactic acidosis. This induced a significant increase in lactate concentration, which decreased ruminal pH. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 94 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). There are several studies on prebiotics in ovine and caprine populations (seven studies; Table 27 ), and two studies for MOS. Due to the small number of articles obtained, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. The presence of MOS prebiotic in ewe diets can influence some blood indices. When introduced to the rations based on meadow hay and grass-alfalfa haylage, this prebiotic elevated haematocrit value and red and white blood cell count, with slightly decreased total cholesterol and triglyceride levels in blood plasma. Supplementation of this prebiotic to the diets based only on hay (without haylage) did not significantly change these parameters. Irrespective of the feeding model, the additive increased the level of alkaline phosphatase by about 31%. Glucan 1 Glucan is supplemented in ovine diets as a mixture with other prebiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. 1 FOS is supplemented in caprine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Yeast cell wall (YCW) 1 YCW is supplemented in ovine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Inulin had no significant effects on selected faecal bacterial populations, BW, haematological parameters, health status orthe incidence of diarrhoea. A dailydose (0.6 g) of inulin might not be sufficient to yield observable immunological effects. Inactivated yeast-bacteria 1 Administration of Saccharomyces cerevisiae dried brewer's yeast to suckling lambs has a stimulating effect on their meat performance traits, lysozyme, ceruloplasmin activity, and increased serum concentrations of gamma globulins. There is only one study about plant extracts (Astragalus derivatives) in ovine and caprine populations (Table 28) . Due to the small number of articles obtained, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 95 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Astragalus polysaccharide (APS) feeding did not affect the immune responses of lambs; a possible reason for this may be that the supplemented dose was suboptimal. However, Astragalus membranaceus root (ATM) dose did affect the immune responses of lambs, including inducing IgM productions and lymphocyte proliferation, and these responses may protect lambs against pathogenic and non-pathogenic immune challenges because the main antibody produced in primary immune responses to antigens is IgM. APS and AMT exhibited consistent antioxidant effects in newly weaned lambs by increasing T-SOD activities in blood and subsequently increasing their total antioxidant status. Reduced blood cortisol concentrations of lambs fed APS and ATM support affects APS and ATM with regard to regulation of antioxidant status. There is only one study on animal by-products (lactoferrin) in ovines and caprines (Table   29 ). Due to the small number of articles obtained, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. Lactoferrin has a direct antimicrobial effect on E. coli O157:H7 and is responsible for the proteolytic degradation of EspA and EspB (two structural proteins of the bacterial type III secretion system). In addition, lactoferrin is an immunomodulatory protein. The results suggest that oral lactoferrin administration could be used to prevent persistent colonisation of sheep with E. coli O157:H7. The systematic review reported five studies of other substances / agents in ovine and caprine populations. Most of these studies concerned minerals (two studies) and other minor groups (Table 30) . Due to the reduced number of articles in each group, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Refs: 8752 12159 Selenium: Comparing different types of Se supplementation, Se-enriched probiotics seemed to be more effective than sodium selenite in increasing blood GSH-Px activities in lambs. Supplementation of Se in the lambs' diet led to improvement of IL-1 and IL-2 levels in plasma. However, there seem to be no significant differences for IL-1 and IL-2 levels in plasma of lambs supplemented with an organic or inorganic Se source. The interleukinsincreased lambs remained in good health during the entire study, showing that the increase of interleukins was a moderate increase and indicating that the immune function of the lambs was enhanced upon Se supplementation. In neonatal pigs, increased inflammatory signalling was detected in the HSe-HIH group (high selenium and 140% of the nutritional requirements), as indicated by increased mRNA expression of TNF- and chemotaxis IL-8. Consistently, phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase, a primary inflammatory signalling mediator, was greater in the High Se-HIH group compared with other treatments. Consistent with cytokine expression, mast cell density was less in the High Se-CON (normal requirements) group than in other treatments. The expression of TNF- mRNA was greater in the HSe-HIH group; consistently, collagen content was increased in the HSe-HIH group compared with the Adequate Se-CON group. In conclusion, independently, neither High Se nor HIH had major effects on inflammation but, in combination, these maternal treatments induced an inflammatory response in the neonatal intestine. Vitamins 1 Vitamin E: Vitamin E supplementation tended to reduce the increments of blood tissue damage indicators during road transport (creatine phosphokinase), thus preserving the health of the animal under stress conditions. Enzymes 1 Amylase is supplemented in ovine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Other 1 Carnosic acid: Carnosic acid promoted changes in the faecal bacterial community, which might be related to differences in feed digestion in the large intestines. 3.4.5.1 Fish -probiotics 3.4.5.1.1 Salmonids A higher percentage of cells were phagocytic in the probiotic fed group. Lactobacillus had an effect on the fish complement bactericidal activity, confirming the benefit for the non-specific humoral defence system. This antibacterial effect was also observed by the higher IL-11 expression in both the spleen and kidney. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s Probiotic bacteria can create a hostile environment for the pathogen by interfering with pathogen colonisation and can also modulate the immune response (enhancement of phagocytic activity of the head kidney leukocytes). Bacillus spp. Not clear. The additive is used as part of aprobiotic mixture. Therefore, the mode of action of the probiotic on its own could not be evaluated. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 98 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Aeromonas bacterial isolates were identified as probiotic candidates with the potential to control or reduce disease caused by F. psychrophilum. A. sobria GC2 was also beneficial to rainbow trout when administered as a feed supplement for the control of lactococcosis and streptococcosis. Aeromonas was positive for siderophore and chitinase production as well as increased lysozyme, phagocytic and respiratory burst activities. Carnobacterium spp. Diets supplemented with 2ME-treated yeast stimulate the immune system (increasing neutrophil count, enhancing serum lysozyme and complement activity, increase in alternative complement pathway activity) and growth of juvenile rainbow trout, thus enhancing their resistance toY. ruckeri. Furthermore, treating S. cerevisiae with 2ME improved digestibility, leading to improved utilisation of yeast cell nutrients. HUFA-enrichment of this yeast was not efficient enough for augmentation of immunity in rainbow trout. Vibrio spp. 6 1 Leucocytes counts were reduced when Vibrio was added to the diet. There was evidence for an increase in the number of erythrocytes and kidney macrophages as well as the proportion of lymphocytes to monocytes. Pseudomonas spp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). haemolytic complement activity values. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s Successful temporal colonisation (i.e. with continual dietary supplementation and for several weeks after administration) of the GI tract by P. acidilactici appeared to cause a general trend toward elevated growth, survival, and immunostimulation (modulates both localised intestinal and peripheral innate immunity). P. acidilactici did not affect tilapia gross morphology or intestinal immune cells. Pediococcus increased in the total number of circulating leucocytes and reduced erythrocyte size and number, which resulted in a lower haematocrit value. A significant increase in serum lysozyme activity was also observed in the fish fed the P. acidilactici supplemented diet. TNF- production was also increased, which initiated a cascade of cytokines that subsequently recruit macrophages and neutrophils to the site of inflammation. Aeromonas spp. For fish fed diets supplemented with Pseudomonas spp., it seems that this species was not suitable as a probiotic for Nile tilapia. However, it was observed that dietary supplementation of P. aeruginosa VSG-2 could improve the innate immunity (increased serum lysozyme and alternative complement pathway (ACP) activities, phagocytosis, and respiratory burst activity in head kidney macrophages and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity) as well as survival of L. rohita against A. hydrophila infection. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). action could not be attributed to it. water. Significant improvements in microvilli height and density were also observed when Artemia was enriched with Bacillus. Adding the probiotic to the shrimp larvae rearing water produced weak inhibition of bacterial growth. Gene expression of prophenoloxidase I, prophenoloxidase II, and lysozyme of larvae were significantly increased after being reared in probioticcontaining water. Bacillus boosted growth as well as the immune responses of the shrimp (increasing phenoloxidase activity, lysozyme activity, nitric oxide synthase activity, superoxide dismutase activity, total haemocyte count, respiratory burst activity, plasma protein concentration, and bactericidal activity). Secretion of digestive enzymes in the GI tract could be another possible explanation for the increased growth performance, which consequently results in optimal health and higher survival rates. Bacillus also modulates intestinal microflora and can significantly improve disease resistance (reduced mortality and colonisation after a challenge) and can protect shrimp from pathogenic bacterial infection by competitive exclusion. Marron fed Bacillus supplemented diets produced beneficial outcomes in terms of physiological condition (organosomatic indices), immune parameters (total haemocyte count (THC), different haemocyte count The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s The early colonisation ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 1 and IFN-g), anti-inflammatory (IL-10) and peripheral Tcell expansion and survival controlling (IL-2, IL-7, IL-15, IL-21 and TGF-1) cytokines were observed in the treated fish. Fish feeding Lactobacillus enriched diet affords higher levels of disease protection (reduced mortality) due to stimulation of the immune system. Resistance against bacterial and viral pathogens is correlated with increases in ACH50 and lysozyme activity of fish fed Lactobacillus supplemented diets. Lactobacillus could be used to improve the hostassociated microflora (increase LAB population), growth, feed efficiency, carcass biochemical composition, and immune response of giant freshwater prawn. However, Lactobacillus failed to maintain its population in the digestive tract of the animal when the prawns were fed anunsupplemented diet, indicating the temporary colonisation ability of the probiotic bacteria. The immune parameters total hemocyte count (THC), phenol oxidase (PO) activity, respiratory burst (RB) activity, SOD activity, prophenoloxidase (proPO), Peroxinectin (PE) mRNA transcription, and clearance efficiency increased with concurrent decrease in cumulative mortality against a challenge. Saccharomyces spp. Pediococcus enhanced the growth rate of groupers and shrimp as well as the erythrocyte counts; it also elevated the proliferation of leukocyte, respiratory burst (RB) of peripheral blood leukocytes, and phagocytic activity of head-kidney phagocytes post-infection, as well as protecting the groupers from vibriosis. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). with the probiotic. Application of Debaryomyces hansenii (S8) helps enhance disease resistance through stimulation of the nonspecific immune system of the prawns (increase in alkaline phosphatase activity). Cellular innate immune parameters were positively modulated in fish by the D. hansenii-supplemented diet. Enhanced ROS production and peroxidase activity in HK leucocytes during oxidative burst were increased, which suggests that an enhanced leucocyte microbekilling capacity is a key factor in increasing resistance to The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Arthrobacter spp. The fermentation process of soybean meal with Aspergillus oryzae did not seem to affect growth performance and feed utilisation but could enhance the absorption of phosphorus and non-specific immune responses in juvenile parrot fish. Streptococcus spp. 1 1 In the shrimp treated with probiotic culture Streptococcus phocae PI80, upregulation of immune genes prophenoloxidase, serine protein (SP), -1,3-glucan-binding protein and peroxinectin (PE) were observed. This upregulation coincides with enhanced prophenoloxidase activity as well as phagocytic activity and enhanced survival in probiotic-treated shrimps. Escherichia spp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Glucans act at the cellular (macrophage) membrane level via a specific receptor, and it may be possible that the linkage of glucan particles to specific receptors modifies the structure of the membrane in such a way that the macrophage becomes more efficient in the function of antigen processing and presentation. -glucan bath exposure could be applied in the enhancement of innate immune factors by up-regulating the expression of complement factors (C3 and factor B) and acute phase proteins (hepcidin, precerebellin and transferrin). -glucan induces an extracellular matrix remodelling process and leukocyte movement in both the gills and intestine. The MHC-II alpha chain was significantly up-regulated, suggesting a role for adaptive immunity after dietary immunostimulation in fish. Functional groups, including inflammatory response (stimulation of the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines), response to bacteria, response to unfolded protein, and response to biotic stimulus, were reduced in the intestine, whereas detection of abiotic stimulus was induced. -glucan influences the specific responses to an antigen in terms of antibody responses to vaccination. Lymphocyte proliferation in the presence of Concanavalin A, which induces the proliferation of Tcells, was also enhanced by glucan. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s In these studies, FOS is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Yeast cell wall (YCW) 10 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Yeast polysaccharides supplementation could affect blood monocytes, leukocytes phagocytic activity, and could improve gut morphology in catfish. Fish fed 1% and 2% brewer's yeast had significantly higher serum peroxidase level and extracellular superoxide anion production of head kidney macrophages than tilapia fed the basal diet. YCW administered in doses of 40 and 60 g/kg feed statistically significantly activated the metabolic activity (RBA) of blood phagocytes and pronephric macrophages. Barramundi macrophages have receptors that recognise different glucans and initiate the respiratory burst response. Inulin 6 1 Inulin is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other probiotic. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Galactooligosaccharides (GOS) 3 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). juveniles. Xylooligosaccharide (XOS) 1 1 Feeding white fish fry with 3% XOS increased skin mucus antibacterial activity and total protein levels. Total autochthonous intestinal heterotrophic bacteria and lactic acid bacteria significantly increased following XOS administration in diet, while no significant effects on intestinal morphology, growth performance, or diet utilisation were observed. Levan 1 1 The haemoglobin content, total leucocyte count, lysozyme activity, and NBT were increased with a dietary supplementation of levan at 1% or more in L. rohita juveniles. -1,3/1,6-glucan modulates the immune response (increase of phagocytic activity and IL1-band decrease of IgM) and stimulates growth of the gilthead sea bream. In marron, the dietary supplementation with -glucan is a significantly higher total haemocyte count (THC) and granular cells. There is a clear-cut elevation in the haematological parameters, such as plasma protein, haemocyte count, phenol oxidase activity, superoxide anion production, The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Rainbow trout fed both soya diets had depressed weight gains and elevated feed/gain ratio. Cell counts indicated increased leukocyte cell numbers as well as increased concentrations of plasma proteins and immunoglobulin in the soya-fed fish. Increased neutrophil, monocyte, and macrophage activity, as assessed by several oxidative radical production and phagocytic index assays, were higher in the soya-fed fish, possibly indicating an inflammatory or hypersensitivity response Allium derivatives 3 1 Garlic increases RBC and WBC. The production of superoxide anion as a measure of the respiratory burst activity and lysozyme activity was significantly influenced by dietary garlic. Thymus vulgaris derivatives 2 1 Dietary thymol supplementation improved feed efficiency, but body weight gain was unaffected. Total anaerobe counts were lower and the Lactobacillus load increased. Activity of glutathione based enzymes, levels of lysozyme, total complement concentrations, and catalase activity were higher in phytogenic supplemented groups. Thymol supplementation reduced NO serum levels significantly. Zingiber officinale 2 1 Rainbow trout fed with a diet containing 1% aqueous extract of powdered ginger roots, for three weeks, exhibited a significant non-specific immune response. Phagocytosis and extracellular burst activity of blood leukocytes were significantly higher than those in the control group. The level of plasma proteins was higher in the group fed with 1% ginger extract. Urtica dioica 2 2 Stinging nettle enhanced extracellular respiratory burst activity and increased the total protein level in plasma. Stinging nettle increased bactericidal activity, lysozyme activity, and Haemaotcrit (Hct) and Hb values. Feeding rainbow trout with 1% stinging nettle for 14 days led to reductions in mortality after challenge with Aeromonas hydrophila. Viscum album 1 1 Viscum album enhanced extracellular respiratory burst activity and increased the total protein level in plasma. Phagocytosis and extracellular burst activity of blood leukocytes were significantly higher than those in the control group. Magnifera indica 2 1 Feeding rainbow trout with 1% mango for 14 days led to reduction in mortality after challenge with Aeromonas hydrophila. There was significant enhancement in serum bactericidal activity, respiratory burst, and lysozyme activity in the treatment group compared to the control group. Use of mango led to the highest number of red blood and white blood cells. Carvacrol 1 1 Dietary carvacrol supplementation improved feed efficiency, but body weight gain remained unaffected. Total anaerobe counts were lower. The activity of glutathione-based enzymes, levels of lysozyme, total complement concentrations, and catalase activity were higher in www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 114 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). phytogenic supplemented groups. Dietary administration of mango kernel increases immunity and survival of fingerlings of rohu. Fish fed with mango kernel showed enhanced superoxide anion production, lysozyme, serum bactericidal, serum protein, and albumin compared with the control group. Mortality was decreased. Oscimum sanctum 2 1 Oscimum sanctum is supplemented in fish diet as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Curcuma longa derivatives 1 1 Curcuma longa is supplemented in fish diet as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Astragalus derivatives 1 1 Astragalus polysaccharides (APS) promote enhanced weight gain, specific growth rates, and improved feed conversion ratio. APS stimulated respiratory burst activity, enhanced the phagocytic activity, and induced lysozyme activity in Nile tilapia. Sanguinaria canadensis 1 1 Sanguinarine had a positive effect on tilapia growth performance, with no apparent effects toward carcass composition, hepatic function, or health status. Trigonella derivatives 1 1 The haematological indicators (WBC, RBC, PCV, neutrophils and monocyte) in Oreochromis mossambicus fed with a diet supplemented with fenugreek, significantly increased compared to control groups. Fish showed elevated phagocytic activity (especially in the case of neutrophils) and lysozyme activity were significantly increased. The mortality was reduced. The results indicate that supplementation of fish with fenugreek could improve the haematological and immunological properties and could also increase the survival rate after challenge with S. iniae. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 115 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Rosmarinus officinalis 1 1 The haematological indicators (WBC, RBC, PCV, neutrophils and monocyte) in Oreochromis mossambicus fed diet supplemented rosemary, significantly increased compared to the control group. Fish showed elevated phagocytic activity (especially in case of neutrophils), which was significantly increased. The mortality was reduced. The results indicate that supplementation of fish with rosemary could improve the haematological and immunological properties and increase the survival rate after challenge with S. iniae. Azadirachta indica 1 1 Azadirachta indica is supplemented in fish diet as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Withania somnifera 1 1 The results demonstrate that fish (L. rohita) fed with W. somnifera root showed enhanced NBT levels, Phagocytic activity, total Immunoglobulin level, and lysozyme activity compared with the control group. The survival ratewas higher in experimental diets. Dietary W. somnifera, at the level of 2 g/kg, showed significantly higher protection against A. hydrophila infection. 1 The number of eosinophils and neutrophils were higher in fish (H. huso juvenile) fed a commercial product with raw fibre. Lysozyme activity was significantly higher. In gilthead sea bream, respiratory burst activity of blood significantly decreased in the bioprocessed soy product groups, while stimulated activity did not indicate significant changes. Serum myeloperoxidase levels, and total bacteriolytic activity of complement, increased significantly at the highest dietary inclusion of bioprocessed soybean, compared to the control group, while serum lysozyme levels did not indicate significant changes. Some alterations in intestinal morphology were observed in the distal intestine. A significant increase in the number of granulocytes was observed after feeding zebra fish diets containing soy protein contents. These dietary components also induced the expression of genes related to the innate immune system, including myeloid-specific peroxidase as well as the complement protein and cytokines. Serum lysozyme activity was not significantly affected by dietary inclusion of vegetable oils (soybean oil). The cacteriolytic capacity of fish fed diets based on n-6 fatty acids rich in oil (soybean oil) was significantly lower. Vegetable oils did not affect basal expression of TNF- and IL-1 genes in proximal intestine. However, in the head kidney, dietary inclusion of fish oilstended to raise basal levels of TNF- gene expression. Complete replacement of dietary fish oil with soybean oil increased TNF- and IL-1 expression in the intestine and head kidney at day three post-infection with P. damselae. Vegetable www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 116 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). oils, as a single lipid source, may affect some immune responses and inflammatory processes. Dietary soy saponins did not affect sea bream growth performance but may improve feed utilisation. Histological alterations of the distal intestinal mucosa were observed but were not characterised as inflammatory responses. The fermentation process of soybean meal with Aspergillus oryzae does not affect growth performances and feed utilisation in parrot fish. We suggest that the fermentation process of soybean meal could enhance the absorption of phosphorus and non-specific immune responses (antioxidant activity, superoxide dismutase activity) in juvenile parrot fish. Allium derivatives 3 2 Use of allicin led to a lower number of white blood cells compared to the levels in controls but elicited increased phagocytic activity, i.e. a phagocytic value of 39.2% compared to 13.6% in the controls, and serum lysozyme activity, which showed significant (P>0.05) differences compared to the control in Oncorhynchyus mykiss. Dietary inclusion of 0.5% onion powder was effective at improving lysozyme activity infish (olive flounder), and onion powder seemed to be an effective immunostimulant to lower mortality upon E. tarda infection. E. purpurea is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Zingiber officinale 2 1 The bioactive compounds identified in ginger directly affect fish health by activating the immune mechanism. The increase in WBC counts, neutrophils, and other blood cells following the feeding of a ginger diet, demonstrates the immunostimulatory effects and anti-infection properties of ginger in Lates calcarifer fish. The haemoglobin content, respiratory burst activity by neutrophils, and serum lysozyme were significantly higher. 1 The ethanolic-extract of propolis was more effective than the crude propolis in protecting fish (Oreochromis niloticus) from infection. Propolis enhanced the macrophage-functions and lymphocyte proliferation as well as resistance to several pathogens. The crude propolis and its ethanolic-extract significantly increased serum bactericidal activity against A. hydrophila. Propolis-ethanolicextract and crude propolis significantly increased the serum lysozyme activity and the HCT-level. Oscimum sanctum 2 1 Oscimum sanctum is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Other Chinese herbs 1 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). resistance against E. tarda in O. Fasciatus. Glycyrrhiza 1 1 Glycyrrhiza is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Plantago derivatives 1 1 Plantago asiatica is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Citrus by product 1 1 The fermentation of Citrus by-products with probiotics could have beneficial effects on innate immunity and thereby increase survival and disease resistance in juvenile olive flounder. Myeloperoxidase and lysozyme activities were increased in a dosedependent manner by dietary Citrus by-products-Bacillus subtilis inclusions. In a consecutive challenge test against E. tarda, increased disease resistance was identified. Carthamus 1 1 Carthamus tinctorius is supplemented in fish diet as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Linum usitatissimum 1 1 Vegetable Oils (linseed oil) did not affect basal expression of TNF- and IL-1 genes in the proximal intestine. However, in the head kidney, dietary inclusion of vegetable oils tended to raise basal levels of TNF- gene expression but did not affect IL-1 expression. Fish oil substitution by linseed oil increased lysozyme activity in infected fish and promoted bactericidal activity. Complete replacement of dietary fish oil with Linseed oil increased IL-1 expression in the intestine and head kidney post-infection with P. damselae. Vegetable oils, as a single lipid source, may impact some immune responses and inflammatory processes. Mentha piperita 1 1 The main active component of M. piperita leaves is the essential oil that contains a number of bioactive compounds (such as phenolic, tannins and flavonoids), which have been known to exhibit biological activities, especially antimicrobial ones. This study demonstrated higher phagocytosis in treated groups, which clearly indicates that the addition of M. piperita leaves in the diet significantly improved the nonspecific immunity of fish. M. piperita has been considered to have effective antioxidant and antiperoxidant properties, which trigger the production of the superoxide anion quantified by the nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT). The higher anti-protease activity protected the fish from infection and, as a result, fish showed resistance to the pathogen which thus increased survival. Panax ginseng 1 1 Panax ginseng is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other probiotics and herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Cucurbita 1 1 Cucurbita moshata is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Lonicera 1 1 Lonicera japonica is supplemented in fish diets as mixture with other herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. extracts showed no adverse affect on growth but enhanced the hematological parameters. Significantly higher red blood cell (RBC) count and white blood cell (WBC) counts were recorded. The erythrocyte count increased with the administration of mangosteen, which might indicate an immunostimulant effect. Aconitum koreanum 1 1 Aconitum koreanum is supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other probiotics and herbs. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Phoenix dactylifera 1 1 The results showed that experimental diets altered the expression of SOD, CAT, and glutathione reductase (GR), particularly in the gill and skin. Palm fruit extracts may serve as good natural antioxidants. Effects on non-specific immunity or disease resistance after feeding Atlantic salmon lactoferrin (LF) supplemented diets were detected. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 119 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  Oral administration of chito-oligosaccharides/chitosanoligosaccharides from shrimp significantly reduced the inflammatory response and stress response in tilapia intestine, as evidenced by decreased levels of mRNAs encoding, TNF- and HSP70, and increased TGF-. Marine fish / shellfish The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 3.4.5.5.1 Salmonids Under the experimental conditions used, the combination of glucan and high doses of vitamin C, for a short feeding period, had a stimulatory effect on the non-specific and specific immune parameters tested. Vitamin C enhanced non-specific immune parameters, such as phagocyte activities and lysozyme levels, while -1,3/1,6 glucan influenced specific responses to an antigen in terms of antibody response in Oncorhynchus mykiss. High dietary levels of vitamin E modulate the phagocytic functions of gut leucocytes in rainbow trout. The vitamin E diet effect seems to be greater inthe local intestinal response compared to systemic (head kidney) response. Algae 17 2 Ergosan (Laminaria digitata and Ascophyllum nodosum) enhanced the density of the goblet cells in fish intestine and pyloric caeca despite as light increase in fish villus length and fold length in the intestine and pyloric caeca shown in the Oncorhynchus mykiss. Ergosan increased villus, fold, and enterocyte height and augmented the surface area of the gut mucosa. Haematological parameters (total white blood cells and red blood cells) showed a significant increase in the Ergosan-treated group when compared with the control group. Ergosan also increased lysozyme activity in the skin mucus, protease activity, and alkaline phosphatase activity. Ergosan enhanced the major immune components of rainbow trout mucus involved in the non-specific immunity Others 7 1 CpG ODN inclusion in feed was able to successfully induce inflammatory gene expression (IL-1) in the head kidneys of fish infected with Lepeophtheirus salmonis. 1 Organic minerals are supplemented in fish diets as a mixture with other prebiotics, fed as a commercial product. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to the minerals. Organic acids derivatives / Fatty acids 4 1 Tetradecylthioacetic acid (fatty acid) TTA have anti-inflammatory effects on the Atlantic salmon kidney (ASK) cell line (increased expression of anti-inflammatory IL-10). TTA attenuates the capacity for production of pro-inflammatory PGE2 and increased the expression of Arg1. It also modulates the immune system of Atlantic salmon. 1 Supplementation of fish feeds with exogenous nucleotides can have a positive influence on gut structure, disease resistance, immune response, stress tolerance, vaccine efficacy,and osmoregulatory capacity at transfer and growth rates in salmon. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 121 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Application of glucan and vitamin U in the diets of fish modulated the non-specific defence mechanisms in sturgeon. Vitamin C, in both the non-specific and specific immune responses of rohu, increased serum parameters, respiratory burst activity, and antibody titers. High dietary vitamin C enhanced the non-specific immunity of fish, including an enhanced phagocytic ratio, bactericidal activity, respiratory burst activity, and increased serum lysozyme activity. The influence of Ascorbic Acid on immune response may be related to its antioxidant activity as a free radical scavenger, protecting cells from auto-oxidation and maintaining their integrity for optimal functioning of the immune system. Supplementation of vitamin E in fish diets seems to protect the complement system from stress-related reduction of activity. Dietary choline enhanced the serum activities of lysozyme and ACP, haemagglutination titer, C3 and C4 levels, and the leucocytes phagocytic activity of juvenile Jian carp after challenge; this suggests an improvement of the innate immune response of juvenile Jian carp, caused by choline. IgM and anti-A. hydrophila antibody titer in serum was enhanced by choline, indicating that choline also improved the specific immune responses of juvenile Jian carp. In Pyridoxine-fed (vitamin B6) group the erythrocytes count, haemoglobin content and total serum protein, albumin, globulin, nitroblue tetrazolium and lysozyme activity were significantly increased while cortisol and blood glucose were decreased. Dietary supplementation of pyridoxine mitigates endosulfan-induced stress and helps to modulate immunity. In Pantothenic acid (vitamin B5), Leucocyte phagocytic activity, lectin potency, lysozyme activity, and acid phosphatase activity, as well as the total iron-binding capacity, were improved. Serum immunoglobulin M levels and agglutination antibody titer to A. hydrophila were also increased. Pantothenic acid also promoted the growth and reproduction The Chlorella could increase the total protein (TP), albumin, and globulins in the serum of gibel carp. Additionally, the Chlorella could increase the superoxide dismutase (SOD) and lysozyme activity. Ergosan has stimulatory properties on cytokine gene expression involved in innate immune response: liver IL-1, IL-8 and TNF-2 gene expressions were significantly higher in trout fed on Ergosan compared with controls, indicating a positive role of this feed additive with regard to improving the immune responsiveness to the AquaVacTM vaccine. Gene expression of Hsp70, and plasma cortisol levels, were lower in Ergosan-treated Oncorhynchus mykiss. Ergosan generally has a positive effect on growth performance, lysozyme activity, Lymphocyte count, and neutrophil count in beluga The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). RBC, PCV and Hb were significantly increased and mortality was significantly decreased. The expression of three immune-related genes (IL-1, TNF-, Lysozyme-c) in the blood was significantly up-regulated and enhanced carp's resistance to A. hydrophila infection. Levamisole supplement, at the lowest level (50 mg/kg), significantly enhanced oxidative radical production and serum myeloperoxidase (MPO) content immediately after 10 days of feeding in Asian catfish. Haemolytic complement and haemagglutination titer were significantly enhanced. Fish fed diets supplemented with Tribasic copper chloride showed significantly increased T-AOC activity and relatively higher survival rates. Fish fed diets supplemented with Tribasic copper chloride showed higher activity of AKP and ACP. Poly-b hydroxybutyrate-hydroxyvalerate (PHB-HV) from Bacillus thuringiensis supplemented diet were found to have significant immunostimulatory effects on both specific and nonspecific immunity (antibody response, lysozyme activity, number of neutrophils), which in turn impacted functional immunity in terms of disease resistance against live virulent A. hydrophila in tilapia. Yeast DNA induced changes in B-cell kinetics in PBL and the head kidney, suggesting suppressive effects that strongly indicate oral or juvenile tolerance in carp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). macrophages. Arginine and/or Glutamine increased lysozyme activity, extracellular superoxide anion, fold height in the mid-and distal intestine, and microvillus height in the pyloric caeca. Organic acids derivatives / Fatty acids 4 1 Silage oil improved cellular non-specific immunity and simultaneously decreased total mortality in tilapia. Silage oil also exhibited significant antimicrobial effects in the feed and GIT of experimental fish. The reason for the improved phagocytic activity of leukocytes in fish fed the silage oil diet could be related to improvement in dietary fatty acid balance. Enzymes 2 2 Refs: 5816 1484 Diets supplemented with Amylase enzyme increased WBC count, total plasma protein, serum globulin, and respiratory burst activity in L. rohita juveniles. Bacillus spp. B546) into fish diets influenced gut microbiota and attenuated bacterial pathogenicity. The higher expression levels of IFN- might be derived from the reduction of virulent factor expression of A. hydrophila. The expression levels of IL-10, TLR5b, and iNOS2a were significantly increased in the enzyme group than the levels in other experimental groups. This phenomenon might be due to the contribution of the yeast polysaccharide residues present in recombinant AiiAB546, which function as immunity activators in feed additive. Peptides 2 1 Feeding common carp with apidaecin could improve growth performance and induce a positive modulation of immune response, likely through regulation of the intestinal microflora, inhibition of the growth of gram-negative potential pathogens, and stimulation of the growth of intrinsic probiotics. Apidaecin could increase the serum lysozyme activity of common carp, and the effect was concentrationdependent. Vitamin C is a beneficial dietary supplement often used for improving growth performance and elevating mucosal immune response (skin mucus protein levels and alkaline phosphatase activity) in Caspian roach fry. P. monodon fed diets containing ascorbate demonstrated that vitamin C is an immunostimulant for P. monodon. Increased weight gain (WG), feed efficiency (FE), survival, total haemocyte count (THC), superoxide anion (O2-), production ratio, and phenoloxidase (PO) activity were observed in shrimp fed diets supplemented with vitamin C. High dietary doses of vitamin E (-tocopherol acetate), together with an adequate vitamin E / vitamin C ratio, may increase the gilthead sea bream's non-specific immune response by enhancing serum complement activity as well as phagocytosis-mediated leucocyte function. Serum IgM levels infish fed with the assayed vitamin A-supplemented diets were statistically higher than those in fish fed a non-supplemented diet, for sea bream. Algae 17 9 Refs: Dietary administration of alginic acid (Ergosan) had a significant effect on serum complement activity in sea bass. In shrimp, differential analysis of haemocyte populations revealed www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 124 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  Acidic Calcium Sulphate increased the phagocytic activity in haemocytes and elevated total hemocyte counts. It increased stress tolerance, as indicated by significant effects on both hemolymph protein and glucose. The prawn Penaeus stylirostris (Stimpson), when fed for 28 days with n-3 highly unsaturated fatty acid (HUFA)-enriched feed pellets, demonstrated an improvement in immune defence potential (increased agglutination titer of plasma and increased respiratory burst of haemocytes). Nucleotides 3 2 Nucleotide supplementation did not significantly influence the growth of fish fed diets with 30% to 50% soybean meal, but could be helpful in improving the non-specific immune response and the intestinal histological structure of turbot. Nucleotide supplementation tended to improve weight gain and survival of red drum, though not at a significant level. Dietary nucleotides supplemented at 1% of the diet enhanced the extracellular superoxide anion production of red drum kidney macrophages. Additionally, nucleotide supplementation increased the www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 125 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). proximal intestine fold height and villus height. Peptides 2 1 Oral administration of immuno-stimulatory peptides does not provide efficient protection to fish fry when they are exposed to high levels of highly virulent pathogens. Fungi -Mushroom 1 1 Dietary administration of the fungus M. circinelloides in sea bream increases complement and lysozyme activity, lymphocyte mitogenesis, leucocyte phagocytosis, and the secretion of TNF-, disease resistance and cell-mediated cytotoxicity. The mechanism by which they exert their influence may be their antioxidant and adjuvant properties. The most frequently examined microorganism related to probiotics has been Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has been reported in three reviewed papers (Table 46 ). Only in one case was the S. cerevisiae used as the unique component; other microorganisms were discussed together in the two remaining articles. In the paper where Saccharomyces cerevisiae was assayed alone, the amount of intestinal yeast was significantly increased, indicating a good survival rate during the feed pelleting process. However, no positive effects were obtained for productive parameters, carcass characteristics, caecal fermentation, and meat quality. No data on immunological response or intestinal mucosa morphology were examined, although this data could be useful considering the effect of the yeast wall on these parameters. When Saccharomyces cerevisiae was used in combination with other microorganisms (Enterococcus faecium as in one paper, for example, or lactic acid bacteria, Candida utilis, Streptomyces albus, Streptomyces griseus, Aspergillus oryzae and Mucor hiemalia in another paper) no significant effects on intestinal microbiota or performance parameters were observed. Bacillus spp. was examined in two papers. In the first, a combination of Bacillus licheniformis and Bacillus subtilis was used, resulting in significant reduction of mortality and decreasing the presence of Escherichia coli and Clostridium perfringens (two of the most important pathogens in rabbits) in faeces. Additionally, improved growth performance (ADG and FCR) was obtained after the use of these two Bacillus spp. In the second paper, the effects of Bacillus cereus were examined with another probiotic, Pediococcus acidilactis, and two www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 126 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The role as probiotic of Enterococcus faecium CCM7420 strain has been analysed in one paper, with good results when applied alone or in combination with the prebiotic Eleutherococcus senticosus. The Enterococcus faecium CCM7420 strain improved performance, stimulated digestive immunity, and increased the host's defence, increasing phagocytic activity and reduction/competition with potential pathogens without induction of oxidative stress in rabbits. In another paper, the strain NCIMB 30183 of Enterococcus faecium was studied in combination with Saccharomyces cerevisiae NCYC Sc47 strain; effects on the intestinal amount of Clostridium spiroforme, Bacteroides spp. or Fibrobacter succinogenes was not observed in any experimental group, and only a significant increase of Enterococcus faecium in faeces was observed in the groups supplemented with the Esterococcus probiotic strain. One paper examined Bifidobacterium adolescentis as a probiotic in rabbits. In this work, Bifidobacterium adolescentis improved the ileum mucosal microvilli height and the crypt depth, reduced the bacterial translocation rate and gut permeability, and also reduced the serum endotoxin levels. Prediococcus acidilactis was used in combination with Bacillus cereus, mannan oligosaccharides, and arabinoxylans oligosaccharides in a previous paper. No significant positive effects were obtained in the group supplemented with Prediococcus acidilactis. One paper studied the probiotic effects of Lactoccocus lactis. This acid lactic bacterium induced a significant decrease in the translocation of Enterobacter cloacae to the lung, the MLNs in the liver, and the spleen of rabbits. No other effects were examined in this study. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 127 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). However, an improvement in gut microbial population was observed by the synergistic action of yeast and fungi on beneficial lactic acid bacteria both in the caecum and the colon. This may be due to the provision of soluble nutrients, particularly B vitamins. Lactobacillus spp. Refs: 703 9506 Lactobacillus enhanced the growth of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) in the rabbit caecum and colon. In addition, administration of milk containing L. paracasei subspp. paracasei to rabbits infected with multidrug resistant S. aureus arrests diarrhoea and improves the reestablishment of the intestinal and colonic mucosae. Bacillus spp. Refs: 5744 8053 Growth performance characteristics (ADG and FCR) were improved by the supplementation of rabbit diets with Bacillus. The main potential pathogens, such as E. coli and C. perfringens, were reduced in rabbits following probiotic treatment. Probiotics could reduce the adhesion of these pathogens to mucus. Enterococcus spp. Diet supplementation with E. faecium CCM7420 could improve growth performance, stimulate digestive immunity, and increase the host's defence capacities by increasing phagocytic activity and reduction/competition with potential pathogens (decrease of faecal coliforms, Pseudomonas-like spp., Clostridium-like spp. and S. Aureus) without induction of oxidative stress in rabbits. The reduction of Enterococci and lactic acid bacteria can likely be explained by the activity of the strain against other enterococci and/or LAB. No negative influences of probiotic application on GPx values werereported. Bifidobacterium spp. Rabbits administered with Bifidobacterium demonstrated obvious improvement in the degree of gut atrophy and extent of liver injury; bacterial translocation, gut permeability and serum endotoxin levels were reduced when compared with rabbits fed with parenteral nutrition without the supplementation of Bifidobacterium. Bifidobacterium feeding maintained the ileum mucosal villus height and the crypt depth and reduced gut permeability. Therefore, the gut barrier was reinforced, thereby reducing the number of pathogenic bacteria/endotoxin translocating from the gut to the liver. The decreased concentration of serum endotoxin in the Bifidobacterium group also suggested a decreased level of systemic inflammation response, which was related to the alleviation of liver injury. Pediococcus spp. Poor growth response was obtained inrabbits fed diets containing Pediococcus. The apparent nutrient digestibility and the ileal morphology were unaffected. Rabbits fed diets containing Pediococcus acidilactis showed a reduction inthe total volatile fatty acid (VFA) concentration. Rabbits fed Pediococcus showed higher TBC (total bacterial count) and caecal Lactobacillus but also the lowest coliform counts. Aspergillus spp. Aspergillus is supplemented in rabbit diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Candida spp. Candida is supplemented in rabbit diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Lactococcus spp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). translocation of the probiotic outside the GI tract. Streptomyces spp. Streptomyces is supplemented in rabbit diets as mixtures with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to them. Mucor spp. Mucor is supplemented in rabbit diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Feed supplementation with mannan oligosaccharides (MOS) and arabinoxylans oligosaccharides (AOS) together with two probiotic bacteria (Pediococcus acidilactis, Bacillus cereus) resulted in an increase in microvilli high as well as a reduction of caecal coliform counts (Table 47) . Additionally, an increase in the caecal volatile fatty acid concentration was obtained in the MOS supplemented diet. In this paper, MOS supplementation of feed improved the gut health of rabbits.  Inclusion of prebiotics (AX) in rations for growing rabbits showed improved growth and improved gut morphology (villus length was increased). Chicoria intybus was examined in young rabbits, resulting in a significant reduction of NH 3 and a significant increase of VFA in the intestinal content; this indicates a higher fermentation degree in gut microbiota. A significant increase in the appendix and follicles size was also observed, indicating direct stimulation of the immune system associated with gut mucosa. The level of neutral detergent-soluble fibre in the feed was examined in another www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 129 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). paper. In this work, the increase of neutral detergent-soluble fibre reduced mortality, improved the intestinal mucosa morphology (increased microvilli and reduction of crypt depth), improved immune response, and reduced the amount of Clostridium perfringens. In study 10571, the observed effects can be explained by the supplementation with the bacterium included in the tested product (Enterococcus faecium CCM7420) but not by supplementation with Eleutherococcus senticosus plant extract. Oat hulls and a soybean concentrate were added to the diet in order to obtain a lower soluble fibre diet. Mucosal atrophy and decreased enterocyte functionality were observed in the animals fed with a low soluble fibre diet; these might cause enhanced permeability of the mucosa to pathogens. Lower levels of soluble fibre (P = 0.074) tended to increase cellular immune response (CD8+ lymphocytes). A decrease in the level of soluble fibre also tended to increase the frequency of detection of Campylobacter spp. Beet and apple pulpwere added to the diet in order to obtain a greater soluble fibre diet. The mortality rates decreased with the increased presence of soluble fibre in the diet. An increase in dietary soluble fibre increased villous height of the jejunal mucosa in weaned rabbits. In addition, rabbits showed a reduction in their crypt depth and an increase in the villous height/crypt depth ratio. Rabbits fed with the highest levels of soluble fibre tended to show reduction in the ileal frequency of detection compatible with Clostridium perfringens. Soluble fibre has a protective effect on the mucosa, improving immune response. Dietary administration of fresh chicory to young rabbits prior to weaning improved the biochemical traits of the caecum content: the lower ammonia (NH 3 ) and pH values and the higher VFA value indicated improved balance fermentation of gut microflora. Significant increase in the size of the appendix and its follicles is associated with fewer follicles. The chicory-fed rabbits had increased solid food ingestion, as well as an improved daily gain, but the slaughtering weight and feed efficiency were almost the same. Beet and apple pulp were added to the diet in order to obtain a greater soluble fibre diet. The mortality rates decreased with the increased presence of soluble fibre in the diet. An increase in dietary soluble fibre increased villous height of the jejunal mucosa in weaned rabbits. In addition, rabbits showed a reduction in crypt depth and an increase in the villous height/crypt depth ratio. Rabbits fed with the highest levels of soluble fibre tended to show a reduction in the ileal frequency of detection that is compatible with Clostridium perfringens. Soluble fibre has a protective effect on the mucosa, which improves immune response. Avena sativa 1 Oat hulls and a soybean concentrate were added to the diet in order to obtain a lower soluble fibre diet. Mucosal atrophy and decreased enterocyte functionality were observed in animals fed with a low soluble fibre diet, and these might cause an enhanced permeability of www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 130 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). the mucosa to pathogens. Lower levels of soluble fibre (P=0.074) tended to increase cellular immune response (CD8+ lymphocytes). Decrease in the level of soluble fibre also tended to increase the frequency of detection of Campylobacter spp.. 1 Dietary supplementation with E. senticosus extract could improve growth performance, stimulate digestive immunity, and increase the host's defence capacities by increasing phagocytic activity and reduction/competition with potential pathogens, without induction of oxidative stress in rabbits. In the present literature review, there were no studies evaluating animal by-products in rabbits. The effects of feed supplementation, with both glutamine and a combination of glutaminearginine, were examined with regard to intestinal health in twenty-five-day-old weaned rabbits. Rabbits fed glutamine supplemented diet showed a decreased in lesions caused by Eimeria spp. but showed no significant reduction inoxidative stress (MPO or PPARg activity). Clostridium spp. was reduced at ileal level along withother significant effects on the microbiota of caecum. No significant effects were observed on either mucosal histology orsystemic immune response. Caproic and caprylic acid, two medium-chain organic acids with antibacterial effects, were examined in one paper. In this trial, conducted on rabbits experimentally infected with Escherichia coli, a highly significant reduction inmortality was observed. Additionally, a significant increase in microvilli high was obtained through supplemented diets. The increase in the area of follicles of Peyer's patches, produced by Escherichia coli experimental infection, was reduced in the supplemented feeds. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 1 1% L-Gln supplementation to postweaned rabbit diets decreased fattening mortality, modified the intestinal microbiota (frequency of Helicobacter spp. was decreased in the ileum and cecum and Clostridium spp. were reduced in the ileum), although no beneficial effects were observed on mucosal integrity or inflammatory and systemic immune response. Diets containing a combination of 1% Gln and 0.5% Arg were of little additional benefit. The systematic review reported eight studies of probiotics in equines (Table 50) , three studies for Lactobacillus spp., another two for Enterococcus spp. and Saccharomyces spp. and one for Bifidobacterium spp. Due to the reduced number of articles in each group, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. Enterococcus is supplemented in equine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Saccharomyces spp. Refs: 1149 5936 S. boulardii survived in horses with gastrointestinal illness (antimicrobialassociated enterocolitis), but no statistically significant differences were found after several days; there was no return to normal faecal consistency, resolution of watery diarrhoea, return to normal heart rate, respiratory rate, or temperature. Resolution of leucopaenia, attitude improvement, appetite improvement, and survival at discharge did not occur. Bifidobacterium spp. Bifidobacterium is supplemented in equine diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 132 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The systematic review reported four studies of prebiotics in equines (Table 51), two studies for FOS, and one each for GOS and AOS. Due to the reduced number of articles in each group, a summary of the mode of action for each group cannot be described in this report. AOS is supplemented in equine diets as a mixture with other prebiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. The systematic review reported only one study of plant extracts (Plantago derivatives) in equines (Table 52) . Due to the reduced number of articles, a summary of the mode of action in each group cannot be described in this report. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). In the present literature research, no studies were found that evaluated animal by-products in equines. The systematic review reported two studies of other substances / agents (minerals) in equines (Table 53) . Due to the reduced number of articles, a summary of the mode of action in each group cannot be described in this report.  and an alternative to antimicrobial feed additives for improving equine immune responses. Its use often results in the improved capability of horses to endure an attack of infectious respiratory diseases. Treated groups showed higher proportions of cells expressing major histocompatibility complex class II and CD2, CD4 + , CD4 + CD25 + , CD8 + , and CD8 + CD25 + T-lymphocytes, dendritic cells, surface immunoglobulin M + B-lymphocytes in peripheral blood, and enhanced cell proliferative responses with phytohemagglutinin and increased phagocytic activity against Streptococcus equi and Staphylococcus aureus strains. The proposed action mechanism of nonspecific immunomodulatory preparations is macrophage activation, and the subsequent release of cytokines might enhance the immune response. Selenium: Se status (either high or low) did not affect the ability of the horses to mount an immune response to a novel antigen or to a previously administered antigen as measured by antigen-specific antibody production. However, cell mediated immunity, evaluated using in vitro mitogen stimulation, appeared to be suppressed in horses with low Se status, as measured by relative mRNA expression of cytokines in PBMC. In addition, in vivo relative cytokine gene expression was also affected by Se status. With regard to pets, the most common additives studied, in terms of their effects on immunity, were probiotics and prebiotics. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s Cats (1): Lactobacillus is supplemented in cat diets as a mixture with other probiotics and prebiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The total IgA in the faecal contents and plasma tended to be increased in Bacillus is supplemented in pet diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Streptococcus spp. Streptococcus is supplemented in pet diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Candida spp. Candida is supplemented in pet diets as a mixture with other probiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. Weissella spp. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). blood lymphocytes. There was faster remission of diarrhoea in dogs infected with EPEC. One negative consequence was the tendency to reduce the apparent digestibility of dry and organic matter. Inulin in dogs resulted in increased faeces production, increased Lactobacillus, and lower crude protein apparent in faecal digestibility. In dogs, the yeast cell wall increased Bifidobacterium, reduced E. coli, reduced the percentage of white blood cells in blood, and tended to increase IgA in serum and ileum. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). these bacteria from adhering to the intestinal wall and colonising the intestine. White blood cell and eosinophil counts tended to decrease quadratically with YCW supplementation, whereas monocyte counts decreased in a linear fashion. Serum immunoglobulin A (IgA) concentrations tended to respond cubically to YCW, and ileal IgA tended to respond quadratically.  Arabinogalactan is supplemented in pet diets as a mixture with other probiotics and prebiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. There were only a few studies on plant extracts (beet pulp, chicory, and Plantago derivatives; Table 56 ). All of these explored prebiotic fibre (beet pulp containing a mix of fermentable and non-fermentable fibres and chicory provides inulin which, in turn, provides FOS-, and Plantago, which provides soluble fibres). Due to the reduced number of articles, a summary of the mode of action in each group cannot be described in this report. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Larix 1 Dogs (1): Dogs whose diets were supplemented with larix showed increased concentration of total aerobic faecal bacteria, higher concentrations of faecal Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteria, and lower concentration of faecal Clostridium perfringens. Specific forms and doses of arabinogalactan (AG) increased white blood cell, neutrophil, and eosinophil concentrations. 1 Dogs (1): Mode of action is not described in this study. The systematic review reported only one study of animal by-products (lactoferrin) in pets (Table 57) . Lactoferrin did not indicate any clear effects on immunity.  Dogs (1): Lactoferrin did not alter the intestinal morphology and had a minor impact on colonisation with lymphocytes and plasma cells. CD8 + lymphocytes were increased in the epithelium of the colon of the lactoferrin groups. The systematic review reported three studies of other substances / agents in pets (Table 58) . Due to the reduced number of articles in each group, a summary of the mode of action for each cannot be described in this report.  Cats (1): Domestic cats can readily absorb β-carotene across the intestinal mucosa. -carotene is also is taken up by peripheral blood leukocytes and is distributed into subcellular organelles, notably the mitochondria. -carotene may play an important role in maintaining the structural and functional integrity of leukocytes. Vitamin B is supplemented in dog diets as a mixture with other probiotics and prebiotics. Therefore, a specific mode of action could not be attributed to it. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Seventy-one interactions have been detected between the substances / agents and other dietary compounds. The main primary interactions studied were those between two or more immunomodulatory substances / agents added to the diet. The aim of studying these was to assess whether or not the effects induced by these have a synergistic or additive effect. Twenty-four, 25, and 18 studies regarding interactions were explored in porcine, poultry and fish populations respectively. Only four studies were found for ruminants. In rabbits, equines, and pets, studies with interactions were not found within this systematic review. More information on these interactions can be found in the tables for porcine (Table 59) , poultry (Table 60) , bovine (Table 61) , ovine and caprine (Table 62) , and fish populations (Table   63 ). The supplementation of glutamine and glutamine plus glutamate (AminoGut) in pre-and post-weaning diets improved feed conversion in the first three week postweaning when compared to control treatment. Quantitative Additive Crypt depths in the jejunum were lower in animals fed the combination of additives (BioMos+Bioplex), and there was also an increase in villus:crypt ratio. 1873 Antibiotic x multimicrobe probiotic The addition of antibiotics to probiotic diets improved the performance of weaning piglets but did not indicate any interaction with probiotics. Qualitative Other Multimicrobe probiotic x antibiotic The main effects of probiotic products (liquid or solid feed), antibiotics (colistin or lincomycin), and their interaction were determined but this interaction (probiotic x antibiotic) was not statistically significant. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s No interactions between Quillaja saponin and curcumin supplementation were observed for any of the measurements. Quantitative Other There was an LPS challenge × diet GlyGln interaction for ADFI, but it was difficult to ascertain whether or not Gly-Gln increased ADFI. A trend for an LPS challenge × diet Gly-Gln interaction was observed for ADG. There was no interaction of LPS challenge × Gly-Gln addition for IL-1 concentration. There were no interactions between LPS challenge and Gly-Gln for IL-2 and sIL-2R. Quantitative Other The second-highest ADG was seen with the probiotic alone, and there appeared to be a biological interaction between the potato starch and the probiotics. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Lactobacillus:E. coli ratio in the caecum when compared with pigs weaned from sows fed the basal diet. However, when the combination of SWE and FO was offered to sows, no effects were detected on E. coli numbers orLactobacillus:E. coli ratio compared with FO-only diets. In the colon, there was a significant interaction between maternal SWE and FO supplementation on the molar proportions of valeric acid, isovaleric acid, isobutyric acid, and total branched-chain fatty acid. FO supplementation induced an increase in molar proportions of valeric acid, isovaleric acid, isobutyric acid and branchedchain fatty acids compared with the basal diet; however, there was no effect on molar proportions of valeric acid, isovaleric acid, isobutyric acid, or branched-chain fatty acids with the combination treatment. There was an LPS challenge x diet interaction observed for jejunal HSP70. There was an LPS challenge x diet interaction observed for jejunal TLR4 and ileal IL-1 receptorassociated kinase 1 (IRAK1). An LPS challenge x diet interaction was observed for jejunal NOD2 and Receptor-interacting serine / threonine-protein kinase 2 (RIPK2) and ileal NOD2. Quantitative Synergistic Inulin applied alone seemed to depress the activity of enterococci in the colon. The combination of inulin and the probiotic formulation in the present study prevented this reduction, resulting in a significantly increased enterococci number in the synbiotic group compared to the control and inulin group and a nonsynergistic interaction of the experimental factors. In the present study, in digesta obtained from colon, enterobacterial numbers were numerically lower in the prebiotic and probiotic groups than in the synbiotic group. Furthermore, the determination of the Lactobacilli:Enterobacteria ratio revealed this significant interaction between the experimental factors not only in the colon but also in jejunum and ileum. In these three observations, the ratio was more favourable in inulin and probiotic groups whereas for synbiotics the values remained unchanged compared with the control. Antagonistic -Synergistic The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). There was an interaction between organic acid and probiotic supplementation for liver weight; organic acid supplementation increased liver weight in chickens fed diets lacking probiotics but decreased liver weight in chickens fed diets including probiotics. The interaction Pea X organic acid (OA) X Probiotic was significant, as the total SCFA concentration was highest in birds fed the control diet without OA and with probiotics (517 mmoles/g), followed by the group fed the pea diet with OA and with probiotics (507 mmoles/g). Other 2909 Phytase (Phy)x Commercial mixture of organic acids Broilers fed phy + commercial mixture of organic acids had higher levels of IgG in the primary immune response as well as higher total Ig and IgG in the secondary response compared with all other groups, suggesting an additive effect of phytase and organic acid on the immune response to SRBC. Quantitative Additive Clove bud x n-6 / n-3 Fatty Acids ratio The interaction between different ratios of n-6 to n-3 and clove bud was significant regarding egg shell strength. The interaction between experimental factors showed that feeding the highest level of clove bud significantly improved FCR in both the high and low ratio diets. There were positive interaction effects of bioactive compounds of clove bud and n-3 fatty acids on cell proliferation of such peripheral lymphoid organs as the spleen. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s In the combination, BP70 and essential oils might exert a synergistic action as there is a significant difference in gross pathological scores between essential oil (EO) and EO+BP70 groups. As BP70 alone did not have any beneficial effects in this study, it can be hypothesised that the essential oils potentiate the effect of sodium butyrate. Qualitative Synergistic 5333 AL (Artemisa leaves) x BCS (black curcumin seeds) No interaction of AL and BCS on BW, FCR, and feed intake was significant. Adding both AL and BCS to the diet significantly altered caecal lactobacilli compared with BCS alone and altered coliform compared with the control group and BCS. This indicated an interaction between these products asthe BCS alone had no effect on caecal bacterial populations. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s The combination of this treatment caused a significant lower average feed consumption than in the positive control group. However, combination treatment had better feed conversion ratio than positive, negative and 0.1% A diets. The combination of 0.1% A+ 0.5% M had no significant differences on digesta pH as compared with positive controls and 0.1% A groups. Higher concentration of total VFA levels and acetic acid were found in 0.5% M and 0.1% A + 0.5% M as compared the remainder of the treatments. There were significant differences between controls and the combination of 0.1% A + 0.5% M groups for valeric acid. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). There were significant interactions between vitamin A and Lf with respect to crypt cell proliferation, not only in the colon but also in the ileum. When introduced to HS diets, this supplement increased erythrocyte count by 4.2% and haematocrit value by 4.7%, whereas its presence in the diets based on hay alone had no effect on these parameters. The MOS additive influenced (P≤0.05) white blood cell counts but its impact varied significantly across treatments. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s Ensuring these two probiotics are the dominant microflora in the intestine, prior to pathogen invasion, may be the key to disease prevention. Less than additive 1800 Arginine x glutamine The combined effects of arginine and glutamine on NBT provide strong evidence of a possible synergy as the production of oxidative radicals was greater in neutrophils from fish fed the arginine-glutamine diet than those fed diets supplemented with arginine or glutamine alone. The same was true with regard to lysozyme activity. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). In this section, the most important indicators are listed in order to describe the benefits of the application of substances or agents. The end-points are then classified into three main groups for the majority of the species: local immune response, systemic immune response, and health status; with the exception of fish, the end-points are classified as measured immunological parameters and health status. Tables for each type of substance and major target species are presented. With the numerical description, a potential proposal of end-points can be assessed. The end-points studied in porcine fed with probiotics are counted in Table 64 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  The end-points studied in porcine fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 65 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). performance parameters evaluated include: body weight, average daily gain, average daily feed intake, and feed conversion ratio. The end-points studied in porcine fed with plant extract products are counted in Table 66 . The parameters most frequently studied with regard to local immune response were The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Bacteria evaluated in the different studies include pathogenic (i.e. E. coli and Salmonella) and commensal bacteria (i.e. LAB). In the case of microvilli structures, the parameters assessed included villus height and crypt depth. The immunoglobulins analysed included IgA, IgG, and IgM. The performance parameters evaluated included: body weight, average daily gain, average daily feed intake, and the feed conversion ratio.  The end-points studied in porcine fed with animal by-products are counted in Table 67 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was microvilli The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). of a total of 26, respectively), representing 34.6 and 30.8% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (18 articles out ofa total of 26), representing 69.2 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. The microvilli structure analysis includes villus height and crypt depth. The immunoglobulins evaluated include IgA, IgG, and IgM. In the case of cytokines, the most frequently studied were Il-1, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-, and IFN-. The performance parameters evaluated included: body weight, average daily gain, average daily feed intake, and feed:gain ratio. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The parameters most frequently studied with regard to local immune response were microvilli structures and intestinal microbiota ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). As a local immune response indicator, intestinal microbiota is the parameter most frequently measured in studies that supplemented poultry diets with probiotics and plant extracts. Microvilli structure is the parameter most frequently studied in the articles in which poultry diets were supplemented with animal by-products or other substances / agents. When prebiotics are added to poultry diets, both intestinal microbiota and microvilli structure are the parameters most frequently assessed. As a systemic immune response indicator, immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA and IgM) was the parameter most prevalent, except when plant extracts were added to poultry diets -in this case the parameter was the weight of the lymphoid organs. The parameters used in all papers evaluating health status were related togrowth performance. The end-points studied in poultry fed with probiotics are listed in Table 69 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in poultry fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 70 . The parameters most frequently studied in local immune response were microvilli structures and intestinal microbiota (32 and 31 articles out of a total of 107, respectively), representing 29.9 and 29.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to the systemic immune response was immunoglobulins The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). immunoglobulins analysed included IgG, IgA and IgM. The weight of lymphoid organs was measured for bursa of Fabricius, spleen, and thymus. The performance parameters evaluated included body weight, body weight gain, feed intake, and feed:gain ratio. The end-points studied in poultry fed with plant extract products are counted in Table 71 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). representing 81.1% of the studies included in this section of present search. Bacteria evaluated across the different studies include pathogenic bacteria, organisms (i.e. Salmonella, faecal oocyst), or commensal bacteria (i.e. Lactobacillus). The weight of lymphoid organs was measured for bursa of Fabricius, spleen, and thymus. The performance parameters evaluated included body weight, body weight gain, feed intake and feed:gain ratio.  The end-points studied in poultry fed with animal by-products are counted in Table 72 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was microvilli structure (six articles out of a total of 10), representing 60% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 158 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). systemic immune response was immunoglobulins (six articles out of a total of 10), representing 60% of the studies included withinthis section of present search. The parameter most frequently studied in health status was performance (six articles out ofa total of 10), representing 60% of the studies included in this section of the present search. A study of microvilli structure evaluates villus height and crypt depth. The immunoglobulins analysed included IgG, IgA and, to a minor extent, IgM. The performance parameters evaluated included body weight, body weight gain, feed intake, and feed to gain ratio. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was the microvilli structure (31 articles out of a total of 85), representing 36.5% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied in systemic immune response was immunoglobulins (29 articles out of a total of 85), representing 34.1% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (49 articles out of a total of 85), representing 57.6% of the studies included in this section of the present search. A study of microvilli structure evaluates villus height and crypt depth. The immunoglobulins analysed included IgG, IgA and, to a minor extent, IgM. The performance parameters evaluated included body weight, body weight gain, feed intake, and feed to gain ratio. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in bovine fed with probiotics are counted in Table 74 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in bovine fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 75 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota (three articles of a total of six), representing 50 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to systemic immune response was phenotypic changes in lymphoid cells (two articles out of a total of six), representing 33.3 % of the studies included within this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (three articles of a total of six), representing 50% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The parameters most frequently studied with regard to local immune response were microvilli structure, oxidative stress, immunoglobulins and phenotypic changes in lymphoid cells (one article each out of a total of seven) representing 14.3% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to the systemic immune response was immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG and IgM) (three articles of a total of seven), representing 42.9% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied in health status was performance, especially body weight and feed intake (six articles of a total of seven), representing 85.7 % of the studies included in this section of the present search.  The end-points studied in bovine fed with animal by-products are counted inTable 77. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 163 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The parameter most studied in local immune response was microvilli structure, especially villus height and crypt depth (2 articles of a total of 4), representing a 50 % of the studies included in this section of present search. The parameter most studied in systemic immune response was immunoglobulins (IgG) (3 articles of a total of 4), representing a 75 % of the studies included in this section of present search. In most articles of this section, health status was not defined (3 articles of a total of 4), representing a 75 %. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). of 21), representing 38.1 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. In the majority of the studies, health status was not determined (11 articles out of a total of 21), representing 52.4 %. The parameter most frequently studied in health status was performance (seven articles out of a total of 21), representing a 33.3 % of the studies included in this section of present search. The end-points studied in ovine and caprine populations fed with probiotics are counted in Table 79 . The parameter most frequently studied in local immune response was intestinal microbiota The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). immune response were immunoglobulins and cytoquines (one articles out of a total of 10 for each), each representing 10.0% of the studies included in this section of present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (three articles out of a total of 10), representing 30.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The end-points studied in ovine and caprine fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 80 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota (two articles out of a total of five), representing 40.0% of the studies included in The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). parameter most frequently studied in health status was performance (three articles out of a total of five), representing 60.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The end-points studied in ovine and caprine fed with plant extract products are counted in Table 81 . Only one study was found in this section. The parameter studied with regard to local immune response was oxidative stress; the parameters studied in systemic immune response were acute phase proteins and immunoglobulins, and the parameter studied in health status was "other substances" (blood plasma metabolites). www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 167 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  The end-points studied in ovine and caprine fed with animal by-products are counted in Table 82 . Only one study was included in this section. The parameter studied in local immune response was intestinal microbiota. Parameters related to systemic immune response and health status were not measured. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Table 83 . The parameters most frequently studied with regard tolocal immune response were intestinal microbiota (two articles each of a total of 4), representing 50.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to systemic immune response was cytokines (two articles out of a total of four), representing 50.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied in health status was performance (three articles out of a total of four), representing 75.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in fish (group 7.1. Salmonids) fed with probiotics are counted in Table 84 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was lysozyme activity (19 articles out of a total of 39), representing 48.7% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was mortality (14 articles out of a total of 39), representing 35.9 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  The end-points studied in fish (group 7.1. Salmonids) fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 85 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was intestine morphology (five articles out of a total of 14), representing 35.7% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (five articles out of a total of 14), representing 35.7% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in fish (group 7.1. Salmonids) fed with plant extract products are counted in Table 86 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was respiratory burst activity (five articles of a total of five), representing 100% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied in health status was performance such as body weight and growth rate (three articles out of a total of five), representing 60% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Carcass traits 0 Skeleton 0 Other 0 Not defined 1 Number of studies with challenge 2 3.6.5.1.4. Animal by-products The end-points studied in fish (group 7.1. Salmonids) fed with animal by-products are counted in Table 87 . In this section, only one study for group 7.1. Salmonids was identified. The immunological parameters evaluated in this study were complement activity, lysozyme activity, and peroxidise activity. Diarrhoea and morbidity were the parameters studied with regard to health status. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in fish (group 7.1. Salmonids) fed with other substances / agents are counted in Table 88 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was respiratory (oxidative) burst (15 articles out of a total of 26), representing 57.7% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied in health status was performance such as body weight and growth rate (14 articles out of a total of 26), representing 53.8% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 3.6.5.2. Fish (Freshwater fish) 3.6.5.2.1. Probiotics The end-points studied in fish (group 7.2. Freshwater fish) fed with probiotics are counted in Table 89 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was lysozyme activity (23 articles out of a total of 42), representing 54.7% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was mortality (19 articles of a total of 42), representing 45.2 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. The end-points studied in fish (group 7.2. freshwater fish) fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 90 . www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 175 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The immunological parameter most frequently studied was lysozyme activity (12 articles out of a total of 34), representing 35.2% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (18 articles out of a total of 34), representing 52.9% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The end-points studied in fish (group 7.2. Freshwater fish) fed with plant extract products are counted in Table 91 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was lysozyme activity (seven articles out of a total of 11), representing 63.6% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance, such as body weight and growth rate (five articles out of a total of 11), representing 45.4% of the studies included in this section of the present search. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 176 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  The end-points studied in fish (group 7.2. freshwater fish) fed with animal by-products are counted in Table 92 . In this section, only one study for the group 7.2. freshwater fish was identified. The immunological parameters evaluated in this study were complement activity, lysozyme activity, and peroxidise activity. Mortality and performance were the parameters studied with regard to health status. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in fish (group 7.2. freshwater fish) fed with other substances / agents are counted in Table 93 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was lysozyme activity (20 articles out of a total of 96), representing 20.8% of the studies included in this section of present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance, such as body weight and growth rate (19 articles out of a total of 96), representing 19.7 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in fish (group 7.3. Marine Fish and Shellfish) fed with probiotics are counted in Table 94 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was respiratory (oxidative) burst (49 articles out of a total of 94), representing 52.1 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was mortality (56 articles out of a total of 94), representing 59.5 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s  The end-points studied in fish (group 7.3. marine fish and shellfish) fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 95 . The immunological parameters most frequently studied were phagocityc activity and respiratory (oxidative) burst for both endpoints (13 articles The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in fish (group 7.3. marine fish and shellfish) fed with plant extract products are counted in Table 96 . The immunological parameter most frequently studied was lysozyme activity (16 articles out of a total of 27), representing 59.2% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was mortality (16 articles out of a total of 27), representing 59.2% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). In this section, only 11 studies for group 7.3. Marine Fish and Shellfish were identified. The immunological parameters evaluated in this group were not clear defined. Mortality and performance were the parameters studied with regard tohealth status. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  With regard to the parameters used for the evaluation of the effects of feed additives on rabbits, the most frequently used are productive parameters: body weight gain (BWG), feed intake (FI), and the weight gain/feed intake ratio (FCR) or derived parameters (ADG, ADFI). In addition, mortality rate is the most frequently repeated indicator of the evaluation of the health status of animals and the reduction of the mortality is the principal marker for health improvement induced by the examined feed additives. Another indicator, in this case related to gut health, is the study of the intestinal mucosa morphology, specially the microvilli high (VH), crypt depth (CD), and ratio VH/CD. The analysis of the intestinal mucosa structure was used in five papers. As direct measurement of the immune system status, intra-epithelial lymphocytes (IEL) were measured in only one study; where lymphocyte subpopulations (CD4 + , CD5 + , CD8 + , CD4 + CD8 + , CD25 + , CD5 + CD25 + ) were determined as well. In one study, the quantification of www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 183 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). the phagocytic activity of leucocytes was used as an evaluator of natural immunity. The appendix weight and the number and size of the Peyer's patches and follicles presented in both structures are additional parameters used for the evaluation of the intestinal immune system. The anti-inflammatory effect of feed additives was evaluated by IL-2, myeloperoxidase (MPO) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) quantification in two different studies. The effects of feed additives on intestinal bacteria translocation to MLNs, liver, spleen, and lung were examined in two articles. The bacterial translocation can be considered the combined effect of the integrity degree of intestinal mucosa and the status of the natural / acquired immunity. Finally, the last effect of feed additives examined in some of the reviewed papers is the change in intestinal microbiota. Seven articles examined these changes, two using general microbiota profiles by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) techniques; another five counted specific microorganisms such as Bacteroides spp., Escherichia coli, Fibrobacter succinogenes, Pseudomonas spp., Salmonella enterica, Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium spiroforme, Enterococcus faecium, lactic acid bacteria or Staphylococcus aureus. 3.6.6.1. Probiotics The end-points studied in rabbits fed with probiotics are counted in Table 99 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota (seven articles of a total of nine), representing 77.8% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most studied in systemic immune response was phagocytic activity of lymphoid cells (one article out of a total of nine), each representing 11.1% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (five articles of a total of nine), representing 55.5% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Local immune response The end-points studied in rabbits fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 100 . There is only one study in this section. The parameters studied with regard to local immune response were microvilli structure and intestinal microbiota. Parameters in systemic immune response were not studied. The parameter studied with regard to health status was performance. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in rabbits fed with plant extracts are counted in Table 101 . The parameters most frequently studied with regard to local immune response were intestinal microbiota and phenotypic changes in lymphoid cells (two articles out of a total of three each), representing 66.7% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter studied in systemic immune response was phagocytic activity of lymphoid cells (one article of a total of three), each representing 33.3% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was mortality (two articles of a total of three), representing 66.7% of the studies included in this section of present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 3.6.6.5. Other substances The end-points studied in rabbits fed with other substances / agents are counted in Table   102 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota (three articles of a total of three each), representing 100% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter studied with regard to systemic immune response was immunoglobulins (one articles of a total of three), representing 33.3% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to health status was performance (three articles of a total of three) representing 100% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in equine fed with probiotics are counted in Table 103 . The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in equine fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 104 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota (one article of a total of two), representing 50.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter most frequently studied with regard to systemic immune response was cytokines (one article out of a total of two), each representing 50.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. Health status was not defined in any of the studies (two articles out of a total of two) representing 100% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in equine fed with plant extracts are counted in Table 105 . This section only includes one study. The parameter studied in local immune response was other (intestine inflammation). Parameters with regard to systemic immune response were not studied. The parameter studied with regard to health status was other (intestinal motility). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). No studies were found in this section. 3.6.7.5. Other substances The end-points studied in equine fed with other substances / agents are counted in Table   106 . Local immune response was not studied. The parameters most frequently studied in systemic immune response were immunoglobulins, cytokines, and lymphocyte proliferation activity (one article for each parameter, with a total of two articles), representing 50.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. Health status was not defined here. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in pets fed with probiotics are counted in Table 107 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Other 0 Not defined 16 Number of studies with challenge 1 3.6.8.2. Prebiotics The end-points studied in pets fed with prebiotics are counted in Table 108 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The end-points studied in pets fed with plant extracts are counted in Table 109 . The parameter most frequently studied with regard to local immune response was intestinal microbiota (three articles out of a total of three each), representing 100% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The parameter studied in systemic immune response was acute phase proteins (two articles of a total of three), each representing 66.7 % of the studies included in this section of the present search. In most studies, health status was not defined (two articles of a total of three), representing 66.7% of the studies included in this section of the present search. The end-points studied in pets fed with animal by-products are counted in Table 110 . The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Only one study was included in this section. The parameters studied in local immune response were immunoglobulins and phenotypic changes in lymphoid cells. The parameter studied in systemic immune response was immunoglobulins. Parameters related with health status were not measured. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). each parameter out of a total of four), representing 25.0% of the studies included in this section of the present search. In half of the articles, health status was not defined (two out of a total of 4 articles), representing 50% of the studies included in this section of the present search. 3.6.9. Methods for the objective measurement of end-points: potential use and limitations The following tables illustrate the relationship between end-points and methodology in order to analyse each immunological parameter. This information provides an understanding of the limitations and the potential uses of the most important end-points. These parameters are usually assessed in order to characterise the immune response induced by the immunomodulatory substances / agents identified in terrestrial animals (Table 112 ) and in fish and shellfish ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Basic performance data. In general, an increase of BWI is associated with positive effects of tested products. Difference of individual body weight at times, in kg Easy collection. Basic performance data. A reduction of FI associated with the maintenance of BW; this is associated with positive effects of tested products. Weight of the feed consumed at different times, in kg The individual measurement of feed intake is not possible under normal experimental conditions. Frequently the measure is collective for the animals into each experimental group. Parameter that integrates BW and FI parameters. It is the principal indicator for animal performance. The accuracy of this data depends on the accuracy of the feed intake measurement. Daily Weigh Gain (DWG) An increase of DWG is associated with positive effects of tested products. Mathematical calculation BWI/days Easy calculation. A reduction of DFI is associated with the maintenance of DBW as well as with positive effects of tested products. Mathematical calculation FI/days Easy calculation. Under field or experimental conditions, the evaluation of clinical signs is used for the evaluation of the health status of animals. Direct observation % of animals Type and scale must be clearly defined in the experimental protocol. Primary indicator for the evaluation of the health status of animals. Direct observation % of animals Easy collection. It is necessary to determine the causes. Microvilli high Gut health and digestive improvement is associated to an increase in microvilli high. Staining and microscopy µm (average of ten measurements per sample) Easy collection but time consuming. An increase is associated with intestinal mucosa regeneration following epithelial damage. Staining and microscopy µm (average of ten measurements per sample) Easy collection but time consuming. The persistence of inflammatory conditions at gut level is associated with the increase Number of cells (average of ten Easy collection but time consuming. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 197 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). of intraepithelial lymphocytes. measurements per sample) Goblet cell The persistence of inflammatory conditions at gut level is associated with the increase of goblet cells. Number and type (average of ten measurements per sample) Easy collection but time consuming. The specific detection of some bacterial species (e.g. Escherichia coli K88, Salmonella enterica, Clostridium perfringens, Brachyspira hyodysenteriae, etc.) is used for the evaluation of enteric pathogen control induced for tested products and the improvement of gut health. Bacterial culture on selective media % of positive samples It is necessary the use of selective media or specific primers. The quantification of some bacterial species (e.g. Escherichia coli K88, Salmonella enterica, Clostridium perfringens, Brachyspira hyodysenteriae, etc.) is used for the evaluation of enteric pathogen control induced for tested products and the improvement of gut health. Plate count CFU/weight or volume of sample Easy but time consuming. qRT-PCR CFU/weight or volume of sample Special equipment is necessary. Standard and controls are necessary. The non-viable bacteria are also determined. Gut health is associated with specific microbiota profiles. Dysbiosis is related to negative performance and, in some cases,to digestive disorders. DGGE or PCR-RFLP Electrophoretic profiles Easy but reduced specificity. The most accurate method. Special equipment and software are necessary. Expensive. In general, the increase of beneficial microbiota components is associated with an increase of volatile fatty acids (VFA), such asacetic acid (reducing faecal excretion of Ca and magnesium (Mg)), propionic acid (increase the intestinal absorption of water and nutrients), lactic acid (reduction of pH and antibacterial effect), and butyric acid (increase the integrity of the intestinal mucosa)). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Indirect measurement for the integrity of intestinal mucosa. Liver, spleen or MLNs translocation are frequently examined. Microbiological methods CFU/weight of sample Easy but time consuming. Weight/size of lymphoid organs The measurement of appendix and Peyer's patches are indicators of the general stimulation of GALT (gut associated lymphoid tissue). Calibrated balance and caliper. g/mm Easy but time consuming. The quantification of general or specific immunoglobulins is used for the evaluation of the improvement of humoral immune response by tested products. ELISA mg/mL Easy, low-cost. The study of surface antigens is necessary to analyse the immune-system components improved by tested products. Some of the examined markers are: MHC-II (associated to antigen presenting cells, like macrophages or dendritic cells), TLR-2 (associated with Gram-positive bacteria recognition and activation of innate immunity), TLR-4 (associated with the recognition of Gram-negative lipopolysaccharide and activation of innate immunity), CD2 (associated to T-cells and NK cells), CD4 (associated to T-helper cells), CD8 (associated to cytotoxic T-cells), CD5 (associated to IgM-secreting B-cells and T-cells), CD25 (associated to activated T-cells, activated B-cells, some thymocytes, myeloid precursors). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). IL-10 has anti-inflammatory effect, and IL-1, IL-2, TNF- or IFN- have proinflammatory functions. Relative increase or reduction of expression Special equipment and software are necessary. Very accurate analysis. Expensive. The activation of macrophages increases the clearance of invasive microorganisms and avoids the negative effects of bacterial translocation to internal organs. Measurement of natural immunity status. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). evaluation of the health status of animals. Primary indicator for the evaluation of the health status of animals. Direct observation % of animals Easy collection. It is necessary to determine the causes. Gut health and digestive improvement is associated with an increase in microvilli high. Staining and microscopy µm (average of ten measurements per sample) Easy collection but time consuming. An increase is associated with intestinal mucosa development. Staining and microscopy µm (average of ten measurements per sample) Easy collection but time consuming. The persistence of inflammatory conditions at gut level is associated with the increase of intraepithelial lymphocytes. Number of cells (average of ten measurements per sample) Easy collection but time consuming. Increased goblet cells in the intestine (mucin-cells producing) are associated with improved condition of the intestinal mucosa Number and type (average of ten measurements per sample) Easy collection but time consuming. Goblet cells may be stained with different dyes in order to decipher their content in neutral or acidic mucosubstances. Histochemical procedures are available for lectin study in mucins. The quantification of some bacterial groups is used for the evaluation of the effects of probiotics and prebiotics on gut microbiota and gut health Plate count CFU/weight or volume of sample Easy but time consuming, and not very specific as there a certain groups of bacteria that do not grow in plates. The gut health is associated withspecific microbiota profiles. Dysbiosis is related tonegativeperformance and, in some cases, to digestive disorders. DGGE or PCR-RFLP Electrophoretic profiles Easy but reduced specificity. The most accurate method. Special equipment and software are necessary. Expensive. The quantification of the activity of lysozyme (mucolytic enzyme of leucocytic origin) provides information about the humoral non-specific immune response. This Spectrophotometric assay U/mL Easy, low-cost. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 202 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). enzyme has antiviral, antibacterial, and antiinflammatory properties. The quantification of the activity of respiratory (oxidative) burst activity provides information about the cellular nonspecific immune response, as neutrophils and monocytes release reactive oxygen species when they come into contact with different bacteria or fungi. Spectrophotometric assay U/mL Easy, low-cost. The quantification of protease activity provides information about the cellular nonspecific immune response. Spectrophotometric assay U/mL Easy, low-cost. The quantification of general or specific immunoglobulins is used for the evaluation of the improvement of humoral immune response by tested products. ELISA mg/mL Easy, low-cost. Small proteins are important tocell signalling during immune response. Some of theseare related tocellular immune response type 1 (IFN-, TNF-), and others to cellular immune response type 2 (TGF-, IL-4, IL-10, IL-13). IL-10 has antiinflammatory effect, and IL-1, IL-2, TNF- or IFN- have pro-inflammatory functions. ELISA µg/mL or mg of sample Easy, low-cost. qRT-PCR Relative increase or reduction of expression Special equipment is necessary. Standard and controls are necessary. Determine the gene expression but not the protein production. Relative increase or reduction of expression Special equipment and software are necessary. Very accurate analysis. Expensive. The activation of macrophages increases the clearance of invasive microorganisms and avoids the negative effect of bacterial translocation to internal organs. Measurement of natural immunity status. Tissue cultureoptical microscopy The macrophage phagocytic activity (phagocytic index and percentage phagocytosis) of pronephros and spleen macrophages. Not easy (cell separation). It is necessary to have solid experience in primary cell culture. Time consuming. Cytolytic activity Similar to phagocytic activity but measuring the reduction of the number of viable bacteria. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The quantification of complement activity (C3 and C4) is used for the evaluation of whether or not the classical complement pathway has been activated. Tissue culture (sheep red blood cells) % cell lysis Easy, average-cost. Phenoloxydase in haemolymph is one of the main defences of the organism functioning as a non-self recognition system. Primarily used in crustaceans (shrimp). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The questionnaire (DistillerSR) performed for each study included in the systematic research had a specific section in which the safety for target animals, consumers, users, and the environment was assessed. A reduced number of studies evaluated the safety of the immunodulatory substance / agent. This might be explained by the main purpose of the tender being identification of substances / agents with immunomodulatory effects likely to be used as feed additives (mode of action and end-points) rather than the safety of these substances. A chain of searches with specific key words for each immunomodulatory substance /agent identified should be performed in order to evaluate safety. The aim of the studies focusing on the safety for target animals is to provide a limited evaluation of short-term toxicity of the additive used in the feed of target animals. This is also used in order to establish a margin of safety if the additive were consumed at a higher dose than is recommended ( The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). and isomalto-oligosaccharides. These saccharides have a long history of safe use and are generally regarded as safe although there is some concern over increased gas production with some compounds, particularly when ingested in higher amounts or during the first few days of intake. There is also a range of new prebiotic compounds emerging, including: pecticoligosaccharides, lactosucrose, sugar alcohols, gluco-oligosaccharides, levans, resistant starch, xylosaccharides and soy-oligosaccharides. These compounds have been studied to varying degrees in vitro and in animal feeding studies but rarely in human feeding studies (Pineiro et al., 2008) . Botanicals contain hundreds of species / subspecies, few of which have been fully characterised; consequently, any pre-assessment may be limited to a single species or even an extract or a specific part of a plant. In addition, morphology and chemical composition of plants may be markedly affected by geographical and environmental factors, not least from the selection of cultivars appropriate for a given region. All of these factors will influence the possibilities for the grouping of the botanicals and for botanical preparations in a QPS approach; the factors will also influence the decision as to what materials can be included in the assessment. The lack of category-specific data and potential differences in pharmacokinetics found amongst livestock, including fish, means that it is unlikely that a composite conclusion necessary for a QPS approach could be achieved (EFSA Scientific Committee, 2014). The potential application of immunomodulatory animal by-products must take into consideration Article 11 of Regulation (EC) 1069/2009 (Regulation, 2009) , which details restrictions on use relating to feeding of animal by-products and bans intra-species recycling (feeding material derived from a species to a creature of the same species) as well as the feeding of catering waste to farmed animals. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The assessment of the safety of the use of additives is related to consumer exposure to food products derived from animals given feed or water containing or treated with the additive and containing residues of the additive or its metabolites. If these substances / agents are not absorbed by the animal, an assessment of the safety of consumer is not required. Users / workers are defined as the individuals who may be exposed to an additive while handling it, when incorporating it into pre-mixtures or feeding-stuffs, or when supplementing feed with the additive. The assessment of the environmental impact of additives is important as administration of additives typically occurs over long periods of time, involve large groups of animals, and the constitutive active substance(s) may be excreted to a considerable extent either as the parent compound or its metabolites. In order to determine the environmental impact of additives, a step-wise approach ought to be followed. All additives must be assessed through Phase I in order to identify additives which do not need further testing. Natural and physiological non-toxic substances, such as The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). (Salminen et al., 1998) . Although lactic acid bacteria are intrinsically resistant to certain antibiotics, in many cases antibiotic resistance is not transmissible, and this will not necessarily translate into sensitivity to clinically used antibiotics (Lim, Huh, & Baek, 1993; Pan & Yu, 2014; Salim Ammor, Belen Florez, & Mayo, 2007; Sherman, Ossa, & Johnson-Henry, 2009 ). Therefore, in cases of probiotic occurrence in manure / excretion products, no particular safety concern is associated with this intrinsic type of resistance. In the case of spore formers, such as Bacillus cereus and enterotoxins, emetic toxin must be monitored in manure / excretion products (Ripamonti & Stella, 2009; Sanders, Morelli, & Tompkins, 2003) . In addition, potential synthesis of mycotoxins and toxins produced has been described in Clostridium and Aspergillus (Sabino, Faisca, Carolino, Verissimo, & Viegas, 2012) , and should also be assessed by means of molecular-based detection kits in the case of probiotic presence in excreted products and manure (EFSA CONTAM Panel (EFSA Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain), 2014). The environmental risk assessment would also be required in cases of additive persistence in manure / excretion products containing Genetic Modified Organisms (GMOs) within the meaning of article 2 (1) and 2 (2) of Council Directive 2001/18/EC (Directive, 2001) . This should satisfy the requirements of the release directive, which includes an assessment of any www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 208 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). potential risks to the environment which are related to the GMOs (Anadón, Roda, & Martínez-Larrañaga, 2004 activity as well as protect animals and their products from oxidation (Wenk, 2003) . Plant extracts are composed of a wide range of low-molecular-weight secondary metabolites, which belong to the classes of isoprene derivatives, flavonoids, glucosinolates, essential oils, and dietary fibre (Halliwell, Aeschbach, Loliger, & Aruoma, 1995; Hirasa & Takemasa, 1998; Rhodes, 1996) . Knowledge of the effects of secondary plant metabolites in feed and guts, their bioavailability by means of extent of absorption, metabolism and excretion, and the extent to which they might be retained in animal tissues is not readily available and ought to be further investigated (Wenk, 2003 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s In addition, other organic feed additives naturally present (such as organic acids, vitamins, amino acids and derivatives, algae, enzymes and fungi) at low dosages and in the absence of toxins and pesticides (algae) can be considered safe for the environment. In the case of mineral radioactivity (Lieser, 1995) heavy metal composition must be assessed during additive evaluation. All safety agencies in third countries provided by EFSA were contacted, but only two answers were received. Both agencies had a similar reaction to the term "immunostimulator". They do not consider all of these substances / agents to be feed additives but rather consider them to have a direct effect on the immune system, as a veterinary drug. No response was received from any of the other institutions that were contacted. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 210 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The results of the specific patent search (using Questel-Orbit© software) of each product obtained from the systematic review are available upon request. In the following tables, the number of patents for each of the substances / agents for probiotics (Table 114) , prebiotics (Table 115) , plant extract (Table 116) , animal by-products (Table 117) , and other substances (Table 118 ) are listed. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The word "stimulate" is used differently by immunologist and pathologists than it is for nutritionists. In order to avoid confusion, Klasing (2007) suggested that the word should be used only in its immunological context, that is, something that causes the immune system to respond (Klasing, 2007) . Thus, pathogens, lectins, and irritants all stimulate the immune system. Microbial and food antigens engage the immune system and induce differentiation of lymphocytes during development. Diet can nourish immune cells, modulating them and facilitating the establishment of commensal microflora. However, diet should not normally stimulate the immune system. Due to the emergence of microbes resistant to antibiotics used to treat human and animal infections, the European Commission (EC) has decided to phase out, and ultimately ban (January 1st 2006), the marketing and use of antibiotics as growth promoters (AGP) in animal feed (Regulation, 2003) . Alternatives to growth promoters should carry the same beneficial effects as AGPs. However, the manner in which AGPs exert their beneficial action is not entirely known. The most wellknown mechanism to be proposed thus far is the idea that AGPs have an antibacterial action that favours performance in different ways: (1) by reducing the incidence and severity of subclinical infections (Brennan, Skinner, Barnum, & Wilson, 2003; George, Quarles, & Fagerberg, 1982) ; (2) by reducing the microbial use of nutrients (Snyder & Wostmann, 1987) ; (3) by improving the absorption of nutrients due to the thinning of the intestinal wall, (4) by reducing the amount of growth-depressing metabolites produced by Gram (+) bacteria (Feighner & Dashkevicz, 1987; Knarreborg, Lauridsen, Engberg, & Jensen, 2004) and (5) by inhibiting inflammatory response (Niewold, 2007) . The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The most common additives studied with regard to immunity in swine were probiotics. Among these 186 studies, the majority were centred on Lactobacillus (69 studies), Bacillus (31 studies), Enterococcus (29 studies), and Saccharomyces (30 studies). In swine, two main mechanisms of action have been described for Lactobacilli. They prevent the proliferation of pathogenic microorganisms primarily through the reduction of pH and the production of lactic acid and VFA. They also have a direct action on the immune system through interacting with intestinal TLR and NOD as well asactivation of NLRP3. Lactobacillus treatment increased intra-epithelial lymphocytes and IgA-producing cells in the intestinal tract and increased peripheral blood CD4+ T-lymphocytes. The same experiment also yielded an anti-inflammatory effect of Lactobacillus, with a decreased expression of mRNA encoding for pro-inflammatory cytokines such as Il-1, Il-8, Il-17 and TNF- and an increased production of immunoregulatory factors, such as TGF- and IL-10. In swine, Bacillus ssp. triggers the immune response modulating the lymphocyte populations and increasing the local and systemic concentration of antibodies. They also decrease E. coliinduced inflammation by acting on the MAPK signaling pathways. Bacillus strains may also alter the type of microflora in the gastrointestinal tract through: (i) decreased oxidationreduction potential caused by the germination of spores in the intestine, which has been shown to benefit the growth of Lactobacilli, and (ii) through the production of some antimicrobials, such as aminocumaim A, bacteriocin, and defensins. Saccharomyces cerevisiae does not change the gut architecture, mucus thickness, goblet cell population, or cortisol level but is able to promote the growth of Lactobacilli. Saccharomyces administration increases the serum levels of antibodies, gamma-globulins, lysozyme, and IFN-, IL1 and IL-6 levels. It also increases the proportions of CD4+, CD8+ and CD4+CD8+ peripheral blood lymphocytes, suggesting an activation of systemic cell-mediated immunity. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). inhibition was associated with the modulation of MAPKinase signaling pathways, the increase of PPAR-c transcript expression, and bacterial agglutination. Compounds of E. faecium EF1 cell-wall, like DNA, could act as adjuvants of the mucosal immune response. Studies also suggest that E. faecium suppresses the synthesis of pro- The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). lymph nodes and Peyer's patch CD4+ cells, and PBL CD8+ cells) were greater in pigs fed glucan. The overall performance of piglets was unaffected by inulin treatment. Inulin increased total aerobes in the stomach and jejunum while decreasing enterococci in the colon. Furthermore, decreased colonic acetic acid and increased lactic acid was observed. Inulin may contribute to the regulation of Fe absorption, either directly by affecting SCFA synthesis or through changes in bacterial population and/or by affecting mucin gene expression. Inulin is able to increase the level of cytokine (IL-1, IL-8, IL-6, TNF-, IFN-) and IgA concentration. Morphologically, increased villous density was observed in the duodenum of piglets fed diet with FOS. A substantial number of studies (68) concern plant extracts. With the exception of soybean derivatives, the mode of action of these plant extracts has been poorly investigated either because they were primarily studied in mixtures (carvacol or Chinese herbs) or because few studies are available (Thymus, Astragalus, Capsicum, Curcuma longa or Achyranthes derivatives, Echinacea, Glycyrrhiza, sugar cane or bran derivatives. Several soybean derivatives have been tested in pigs. Soybean oligosaccharides promoted the growth of bacterial species that are potentially beneficial to the host and increased the concentration of SCFA in the ileum and colon while simultaneously reducing the number of potentially harmful bacteria and the production of protein-derived catabolites. They increase the expression of ZO-1 mRNA but diminished the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-, IL-1, and IL-8 mRNA and increased that of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. Pigs treated with soy peptides showed reduced expression of inflammatory cytokines (IFN-, TNF, and IL12B) as well as genes involved in differentiation of Th17 cells (IL17A and RORC) at the expense of the pathway of regulatory T-cells (FoxP3). Soy di-and tripeptide decreased crypt depth. Antigenic soybean product increased diarrhoea, reduced the size of villi and eosinophil density in the duodenum more so than the non-antigenic soybean product. Beta-sitosterol (phytosterol of soybean) increased peripheral blood mononuclear cell numbers and activated www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 220 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Twenty-eight studies concern animal by-products, primarily spray-dried plasma (11 studies). Antibodies from egg-yolk or colostrum (seven studies), lactoferrin (five studies), and fish oil (two studies) were also tested.  The different bacterial species in the normal microbiota (colonising on the epithelium of the digestive tract or occurring freely in the gut lumen) of the broiler gut reach a typical equilibrium state approximately a week after hatching; this is dependent on many factors, including location in the gastro-intestinal tract, integrity of the intestinal mucosa, and transit time of the chymus (Teirlynck et al., 2009; van Der Wielen et al., 2000) . Depending on the probiotic strain, the mode of action likely involves the production of specific metabolites (short organic fatty acids, H 2 O 2 , intermediary metabolites with antimicrobial activity), interaction with receptor sites, stimulation / modulation of the www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 221 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). immune system, and several others (Huyghebaert et al., 2011; Madsen, 2001; Sherman et al., 2009) . The most well known group of probiotics are lactic acid bacteria (in particular, Lactobacillus; 113 articles). The administration of live non-pathogenic bacteria in poultry diets has the aim of (1) displacing pathogenic microorganisms for competitive exclusion colonising the gut tract, (2) avoiding growth and adhesion / translocation / colonisation of pathogenic microorganisms, and (3) they kill the invaders using a variety of strategies, such as phagocytosis and oxidative burst (Brisbin, Gong, & Sharif, 2008) . Toll-like receptors (TLR) are germ line encoded pattern recognition receptors that recognise conserved structural motifs known as pathogen-associate molecular patterns expressed by microbes (Akira, Takeda, & Kaisho, 2001) . After TLR activation, one possible outcome is the www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 222 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). synthesis and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The presence of these cytokines modulates adaptive immunity. B-and T-cells, which elicit antibody-mediated and cellmediated immune responses respectively, are the two primary types of lymphocytes of fundamental importance to the adaptive immune system. In the avian gut, B-and T-cells can be found in organised lymphoid tissues (e.g. caecal tonsils, Peyer's patches, thymus, and the bursa of Fabricius) as well as in more dispersed areas, such as the lamina propria and the epithelium (Brisbin et al., 2008; Haghighi et al., 2006) . Studies have indicated that manipulation of the gut microbiome, through administration of immunomodulatory substances / agents, can influence cell-and antibody-mediated immune response (Pan & Yu, 2014 ). The first two weeks post-hatch are of significant immunological importance as the chick is immediately exposed to environmental antigens and pathogens, resulting in changes to intestinal lymphocytes and the temporal development of lymphocyte functions (Bar-Shira, Sklan, & Friedman, 2003) . Therefore, studies exploring such effects on the immune system for immunomodulatory substances, in cases of poultry, should be performed during the first weeks of life (not later than 21 days). Those experiments should analyse microbiota, microvilli, the mucosa structure, innate immunity (TLR up/down regulation), differentiation of naïve T-cells into mature effector cell types (Th1, Th2, Th17 and Treg functions), and several types of cytokine expression. Additionally, it would be interesting to associate the results obtained from early immune response with the performance of the animal at the end of the process of the fattening period as applicable to chickens. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). similar vein, some studies have shown that LAB have effectively reduced the number of microorganisms capable of causing inflammation due to the production of organic acids (acetic and lactic acid), hydrogen peroxide, and bacteriocins. More specifically, some LAB, under certain conditions, may improve the expression of IL-4R and have potential to increase IL-1b production and enhance cell death. A possible mechanism by which the additive increases neutrophil IL-1 secretion is via IL-4R-dependent activation of the IL-1 converting enzyme (ICE). Increased expression of the EGF receptor implies that neutrophils of the treated animals may be more sensitive to EGF signaling and therefore may be more sensitive to TNF. Other bacterial probiotics that have been studied extensively are Enterococcus and Bacillus; however, the modes of action of these bacteria are less consistent and less well-described. The literature reports primarily overall improvements in health (such as the reduction of diarrhoea, morbidity, and death). There are many more bacterial probiotics used in ruminants, but the literature about these bacteria is scarce. Saccharomyces spp. is a yeast probiotic that has been reported to exert influence effects on the health of young ruminants. However, their mode of action is not very well understood / described at this point in time. There is only one study using fungal probiotics (Aspergillus spp.), but its results were inconclusive. The literature around probiotics is also limited. The most consistent effect of these substances on immune function, in both large and small ruminants, has been reported for mannan oligosaccharides; again, the mode of action here has not been well identified at the time of writing. A range of plant extracts has been tested in ruminants. However, as commonly occurs with these products, there is significant variability in the results (partly due to the inherent variability within the raw material), and the studies provide only speculation about potential mode of actions rather than reaching a clear conclusion. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 224 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The potential effects of trace minerals on immune function have been moderately reported in the literature, yet no clear mode of action has been proposed, and the majority of studies report only overall health improvements and speculate about potential underlying mechanisms behind these outcomes. There are many other feed additives (sodium butyrate, lactoferrin, algae, nucleotides, etc.) for which there is only one study and no clear conclusion could be derived. with pathogen colonisation in the gut and in most cases modulating the host immune response. In addition, the above-mentioned competition with a potential pathogen in the colonisation of the gut may result in changes to the microbiota and in the density of intestinal goblet cells, as has been reported with Bacillus spp. This analysis does not imply that this mode of action is not present in the remainder of the probiotics tested in salmonids, as there has been a lack of coherence in the methodological approach for assessing the mode of action of different feed additives and, consequently, this parameter was not assessed in scientific studies exploring the remainder of the probiotic bacteria listed in Table   31 . The aforementioned increase in the density of intestinal goblet cells producing the layer of mucus covering the intestinal epithelium has been indirectly associated with the www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 225 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s In some other studies, Lactoccocus spp. has been described to enhance the phagocytic activity of the head kidney leucocytes, Vibrio spp., the number of erythrocytes, kidney macrophytes, the proportion of lymphocytes to monocytes, Pseudomonas spp., the number of leucocytes, IgM production, and serum lysozyme levels. In addition, some probiotic bacteria (e.g. Aeromonas spp., Bacillus spp.) have been reported to increase the production of chitinase and siderophores (iron chelating compound limiting bacterial growth). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). It is important to mention that the amount of literature exploring probiotics in salmonids was 4.3 times higher than literature about prebiotics. The number of different additives tested was also higher here. Due to their different origins, characteristics, and properties, prebiotics exert different effects on the organism; unlike with probiotics, it is not simple to generalise their modes of action. Among the different prebiotics tested in salmonids, -glucan was the most frequently evaluated in this group of fish (50% of revised manuscripts dealing with prebiotics focused on -glucans). -glucan enhances the innate immune factors by upregulating expression of complement factors (C3 and factor B) and acute phase proteins The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). salmonid feeds in order to better characterise its mode of action and effects on health, as there are just three scientific articles exploring these prebiotics. There is not a clear trend in the preference of testing different plant extracts in salmonids, as the efforts on different compounds may be considered similar (only one manuscript was found for each of the plant extracts considered in this section). The inclusion of garlic (Allium spp.) in salmonids feeds results in an increase in the number of red and white blood cells as well as an increase in the respiratory burst activity and lysozyme. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Only lactoferrin has been tested as an immune stimulant in diets for salmonids, and no effects on the non-specific immunity and disease tolerance were found in salmon. Vitamin and algae extracts are two of the most frequently tested feed additives in salmonid fish species. In this context, most of the available literature is related to vitamins C and E. In particular, the combination of -glucan and high doses of vitamin C had a stimulatory effect on the non-specific and specific immune parameters, and vitamin C enhanced non-specific immune parameters such as phagocyte activities and lysozyme levels, while -glucan influenced the specific response to an antigen in terms of antibody response. High dietary levels of vitamin E modulated the phagocytic functions of gut leucocytes in rainbow trout. Nevertheless, the role of these two vitamins as natural antioxidant agents should not be neglected although there is no direct information about their mode of action with regard to this issue. Algae have been tested as a source of feed additives with immunostimulant properties in salmonids. In this sense, a commercial product named Ergosan (a mixture of Laminaria digitata and Ascophyllum nodosum) modified the organisation of the intestine (increasingvillus height, fold height, enterocyte height, number of goblet cells, and augmenting surface area of the gut mucosa). In addition, it increased some hematological parameters (total white blood cells and red blood cells) and lysozyme activity in the skin mucus, protease activity, and alkaline phosphatase activity. Supplementation of fish feeds with exogenous nucleotides can have a positive influence on gut structure, disease resistance, immune response, stress tolerance, and vaccine efficacy; however, their mode of action regarding the aforementioned processes has not been analysed in depth. In vitro studies have revealed that tetradecylthioacetic acid (fatty acid) has anti-inflammatory effects in the ASK cell line (increased expression of anti-inflammatory IL-10) and also attenuates the capacity for production of pro-inflammatory PGE2 while increasing the www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 229 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). expression of Arg1. These in vitro results need to be validated using in vivo nutritional studies, and TTA effects on other compartments of the immune system ought to be tested. Different minerals have been tested as immune stimulants in fish diets, but as these additives were included in diets as a mixture with other additives their mode of action could not be determined. The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). immunity (increased lysozyme, alternative complement, respiratory burst activities) and levels of SOD in rohu (Labeo rohita). The administration of inactivated cell suspensions of Aeromonas spp. enhanced the cellular and humoral immune responses, although there are contradictory results reporting that cellular rather than humoral immunity is the factor that explains the beneficial effects of these probiotic bacteria. However, the mode of action of such enhancement was not described in the two studies exploring these probiotic bacteria. Similar results regarding the enhancement of the cellular, rather than humoral, immunity have been reported in freshwater fish fed diets incorporating Carnobacterium spp. As described in salmonids, the modulation of gut microbiota has been described in freshwater fish species fed with diets supplemented with Bacillus spp., Lactobacillus spp., Lactococcus spp., Pediococcus spp., and Enterococcus spp., although this does not mean that the other probiotics tested exert the same effect on freshwater species as there is a gap of information on this parameter in those studies. The use of the yeast Saccharomyces spp. and antioxidative stress parameters (MPO levels, CAT and SOD activities). In some of the literature analysed, some probiotics (e.g. Micrococcus spp., Aspergillus spp.) were tested within a mixture of different probiotic bacteria and consequently it was not possible to decipher their specific modes of action. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 231 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The revision of the available literature indicated that prebiotics have been more frequently investigated in freshwater species than in salmonids, even though -glucan, mannan oligosaccharides (MOS), and fructooligosaccharides (FOS) are the most frequently evaluated prebiotics compounds in this group of fish (56% of the studies explore the above-mentioned additives). AXOS has also been reported to enhance immune function, although this additive's mode of action has not been described. Similarly, the administration of chitooligosaccharides (COS) has been reported to enhance fish immunity (cellular and humoral response) by increasing www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 232 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). leucocyte counts as well as respiratory burst activity, lysozyme activity, SOD, and phagocytic activity. Contrary to the other oligosaccharide compounds tested, xylooligosaccharides (XOS) increased mucus antibacterial activity and total protein levels; it also modulated gut microflora by increasing the number of lactic acid bacteria and heterotrophic bacteria, but no effects on intestinal morphology were observed. When used as a feed additive, Levan increased haemoglobin content, lysozyme activity, and respiratory burst activity. The inclusion of inactivated yeast-bacteria has been reported to modulate gut microbiota, but no information is available on its effects on the immune function of fish. Further information is required on the aforementioned feed additives, as the literature on their effects on the immune system and overall condition of fish is currently limited. Other prebiotic compounds, such as inulin and lipopolysaccharide (LPS), have been tested in fish diets; this has been done as a mixture with other additives, so their individual modes of action could not be determined. The number of studies evaluating different plant extracts in freshwater fish species are almost double the number of studies on salmonids. There is a scarcity of studies dealing with a similar compound; all the information for each of the plant extracts tested is presented in just one manuscript, with the exception of Achyranthes spp. derivatives, which has three. Thus the inclusion of Achyranthes spp. derivatives the diets of different Indian carp resulted in a higher serum of protein and globulin levels as well as myeloperoxidase activities. The inclusion of Thymus vulgaris derivatives (thymol) affected the blood phagocytic activity but not the level of respiratory burst activity or the lysozyme activity. Unlike the information available about salmonids, there is no data on the effects of thymol on gut microbiota, so a similar effect in freshwater fish species cannot be stated with certainty. The inclusion of propolis in the diets of freshwater fish species enhanced the humoral immune response by increasing the serum and mucus lysozyme activity. Propolis was tested, and evidence indicates that its ethanolic-extract was more effective than crude propolis in protecting fish against infection. In this case, propolis enhanced macrophage-functions and lymphocyte proliferation, as well as the serum bactericidal and lysozyme activities; this meant increased resistance to several pathogens. Similarly, the use of mango kernel www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 233 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). (Magnifera indica) and Astragalus polysaccharides also enhanced humoral immune response by increasing the production of the superoxide anion, lysozyme, serum bactericidal activity, and serum protein and albumin levels. Alnus firma, Trigonella spp. and Rosmarinus officinalis derivatives, as well as raw fibre, have been reported to increase the number of white and red blood cells, neutrophils, and monocytes, as well as the phagocytic activity of neutrophils and an increase in serum lysozyme, haematological, and immunological changes that were coupled with a decrease in mortality when fish were challenged with Streptococcus iniae. Other plant derivatives, such as those obtained from Withania sommifera, have been shown to enhance the humoral immune response (respiratory burst activity, lysozyme, Ig levels) that increased the survival of fish challenged by Aeromonas hydrophila. Other plant-derived compounds like those originating from Oscimum sanctum, Azadirachta indica and Curcuma longa have been tested in fish diets as a mixture with other additives, so their mode of action could not determined. As with salmonids, there is little edata available on the use of animal by-products as feed additives for enhancing the immune condition of freshwater fish, which may be due to the tight regulation involved in using these substances. Unlike in the study conducted in salmonids, lactoferrin dietary administration in catfish resulted in an enhancement of the humoral immune response (increased serum lysozyme level, oxidative radical production) that meant increased protection from Aeromonas hydrophila challenge. In addition, the administration of chitooligosaccharides / chitosan-oligosaccharides obtained from shrimp significantly reduced the inflammatory response and stress response in tilapia intestine, as evidenced by lower levels of mRNAs encoding for TNF- and HSP70 and a higher level for The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). larger variety of vitamins has been tested in freshwater fish species than in salmonids. Vitamin C enhanced both the non-specific and specific immune responses in Indian carp by increasing serum parameters, respiratory burst activity, lysozyme activity, bactericidal activity, and antibody titers. The influence of vitamin C on immune response may also be related to its antioxidant activity as a free radical scavenger, protecting cells from autooxidation and maintaining their integrity, potentially leading to optimal functioning of the immune system. Supplementation of vitamin E in the diet seems to protect the complement system from stress-related reduction of activity, whereas choline enhanced serum activities of lysozyme and ACP, haemagglutination titer, C3 and C4 levels, and leucocytes phagocytic activity of carp after a challenge suggest an improvement in innate immune response. IgM and anti-AH antibody titer in serum were enhanced by choline, and similar results have been reported with vitamins B6 and B5, for which enhancement of the humoral immune response was reported. Regarding the use of algae derivatives, the effects of Ergosan in freshwater fish species was similar to that found in salmonids, especially in terms of enhancing the activity of lysozyme, lymphocyte, and neutrophil counts. The incorporation of Chlorella spp. has been reported to increase the total protein albumin and globulin content in the serum, as well as the activities of SOD and lysozyme, thus affecting the humoral immune response. Feeds incorporating Dunaliella salina as a food additive resulted in an increase in red and white blood cells, but the mode of action of this microalga or its active compounds is unknown. The administration of apidaecin-type peptides induce positive modulation in the immune response, likely through regulating the intestinal microflora, inhibiting the growth of gramnegative potential pathogens and thus stimulating the growth of intrinsic probiotics. In addition, apidaecin increased serum lysozyme activity, thus having a direct effect on the humoral immune response. Amino acids have frequently been evaluated for their potential immunostimulant properties, and among these there is available information for four types. In this sense, methionine The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). supplementation tended to improve neutrophil oxidative radical production and intracellular superoxide anion production in head kidney macrophages, but it also increased the humoral immune response (lysozyme activity and extracellular superoxide anion production) and promoted the growth of the intestinal epithelium (fold height in the mid-and distal intestine and microvillus height in the pyloric caeca). The role of minerals (chromium) as immunostimulants in different freshwater species has been analysed, but no clear conclusions can currently be made based on these studies as it is sometimes unclear whether the results correspond to an effect derived from a potential toxic effect of mineral accumulation or is due to its properties as an immune stimulant. Silage oils have been described as improving cellular non-specific immunity and simultaneously decreasing total mortalities in tilapia; this has been attributed to these oils' antimicrobial effects of improving the phagocytic activity of leukocytes. Other compounds, such as extracellular extracts of Aeromonas veronii and Flavobacterium sasangense, poly-b hydroxybutyrate-hydroxyvalerate (PHB-HV) from Bacillus thuringiensis or N-acyl Homoserin Lactonase from Bacillus spp. strain B546, were found to have significant immunostimulatory effects on both specific and non-specific immunity (antibody response, lysozyme activity, number of neutrophils), which may be due to the presence of PAMP in these extracts. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 236 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). As with salmonids and freshwater fish species, Bacillus spp. and Lactobacillus spp. were the probiotic bacteria mostly frequently tested in shellfish and marine fish species; these represent 53% of the scientific articles published in this area. The The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). several immune parameters such as total hemocyte count, phenol oxidase (PO) activity, respiratory burst activity, SOD activity, proPO, and PE mRNA transcription, although this probiotic disappeared from the gut of shrimp when its dietary administration was interrupted. Pediococcus spp., Arthrobacter spp., Aeromonas spp. and Enterococcus spp. The use of the yeast Saccharomyces spp. induced the up-regulation of innate cellular and humoral immune responses (SOD, phagocytic, and respiratory burst activities in head kidney leucocytes, as well as levels of serum lysozyme, complement activity, and citotoxic activity). In shrimp, Saccharomyces spp. has been reported to increase serum lysozyme, as well as improving the quality of the sediment in shrimp rearing ponds (improvement of rearing The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). conditions). Another yeast tested as a probiotic is Debaromyces spp., which has been reported to modulate the intestinal microbial community and increase the non-specific humoral immune response (alkaline phosphatase activity) in shrimp, as well as improving the cellular immune function in fish. In addition, Debaromyces spp. up-regulated the expression of several genes (IgM, MHC-Ia, MHC-IIa, C3, IL-1, TLR, TNF-, CSF-1R, NCCRP-1, Hep, TCR- and CD8 genes) in the skin, intestine, and head kidney. Other tested probiotics, such as Paffia spp. or Aspergillus spp., did not have the desired probiotic effect. The same trend observed in the experimental administration of prebiotics in marine fish and shellfish has been detected with regard to these compounds tested in salmonids and freshwater fish species; these additives include -glucan, mannan oligosaccharides (MOS), and fructooligosaccharides (FOS) as the most frequently studied (73% of the scientific articles explore these three additives). It is interesting to note that prebiotics were more frequently studied in shellfish and marine fish species than they were in freshwater fish and salmonids. It seems that -glucan modulated immune response by increasing phagocytic activity and IL-1 and decreasing IgM in fish. In marron (crustacean species), -glucan increased the total haemocyte count and granular cells, whereas it increased plasma protein, haemocyte count, phenol oxidase activity, superoxide anion production, alkaline phosphatase, and acid phosphatase activity in shrimp. As it did in fish, -glucan indirectly affected the response of the host to pathogen by reducing the level of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 and increasing IL-1. As with salmonids and freshwater fish species, the administration of MOS in feed directly The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). the microbial community in marine fish or shellfish species. In sea cucumbers (echinoderm species), the administration of FOS resulted in total coelomocyte counts and phenoloxidase activity and could enhance phagocytosis as well as potentially modulating gut microflora. In shrimps, FOS altered the gut microflora and enhanced the humoral immune response (respiratory burst activity of hemocytes). In contrast, FOS administration in fish was detrimental in terms of the organisation of the digestive tract, but it increased the levels of haemoglobin, leucocytes and lymphocytes, although the correlation of these values to a higher immune competence of fish has not been clearly established at this time. Other tested oligosaccharide compounds in marine fish and shellfish are galactooligosaccharides (GOS) and transgalactooligosaccharides (TOS), which have been reported to increase the humoral immune response (lysozyme), affect the composition of the microbiota in the case of GOS, change the morphology of the intestine (increase the length of the intestinal folds, enterocyte's size, and microvilli size), and modulate the activity of digestive enzymes in the case of TOS. The administration of yeast cell walls in the diets of marine fish and shellfish enhanced immune response, as well as the organisation of the intestine (enlarged intestine folds height and width, increase in microvilli height, number of goblet cells in the intestine, and the production of mucus, thus enhancing this protective barrier in the gut) and the activity of the digestive enzymes. Although the effects of this feed additive on gut morphology were well characterised, their mode of action on the immune response was not addressed in detail. The administration of chitin enhanced the humoral immune response by increasing the activity of the haemolytic complement and respiratory and cytotoxic activity in leucocytes in fish. Contradictory findings have been found regarding the use of inulin when comparing data obtained from fish and shrimp. In particular, the combination of Bacillus subtilis and inulin exerts a negative effect on gilthead sea bream gut homeostasis, and to date immunostimulant effect of inulin on the innate immune system has not been found in this marine fish species. In contrast, inulin has been reported to reduce the prevalence of white spot syndrome (WSSV) in shrimp, although its mode of action has not yet been described. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 240 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Plant-derived extracts have been more frequently studied in marine fish and shellfish species than into salmonids and freshwater fish species, not only in term of the number of different compounds but also in terms of the number of studies. However, similarly to the other group of fish species, there is generally only one scientific study per plant-derived compound. Allium spp. derivatives in diets for marine fish enhanced the humoral immune response, as was reported in salmonids species. This immune enhancement was correlated with a lower mortality in fish exposed to Edwarsiella tarda. Similar results were reported for Zingiber officinalis, which were reported to increase haemoglobin content, respiratory burst activity of neutrophils and serum lysozyme, and the number of white blood cells. These results are in accordance with those reported by Kalopanax pictus, in which the enhancement of the humoral immune response (higher levels of respiratory burst activity, lysozyme activity, bactericidal activity, total protein, and myeloperoxidase) was coupled with increased resistance to the pathogenic bacteria Vibrio alginolyticus as well as increased resistance tothe parasite (P. dicentrarchi). Similar results were reported with the dietary administration of Broussonetia kazinoki; there was an enhancement in the humoral immune response (increase of phagocytic, complement, lysozyme, and respiratory activities) accompanied by increased resistance to an infection of Streptococcus parauberis. In this sense, the inclusion of Lactuca indica has been reported to increase humoral immune function, but this finding was not correlated with an increased tolerance to a pathogen, as no bacterial challenge was conducted in the study analysed. The inclusion of Citrus by-products, in combination with probiotics, has been reported to increase myeloperoxidase and lysozyme activities; these results were translated into increased disease resistance to E. tarda. However, further information is needed about the mode of action of this product and its combined effects with probiotics. The use of Mentha piperita in the diets of marine fish and shellfish species resulted in increased phagocytic activity, which significantly improved the non-specific immunity of fish. In addition, the main active component of M. piperita leaves is the essential oil that contains a number of bioactive compounds (such as phenolic, tannins, and flavonoids) known to exhibit biological activities, especially antimicrobial activities. This is also an effective The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). antioxidant and antiperoxidant compound, which triggers the production of a superoxide anion. These properties have been correlated with the increased survival of fish exposed to pathogenic bacteria. Other plant-derived products, such as those obtained from Phoenix dactylifera, have been reported to be a good source of natural antioxidants, as these regulate the transcription levels of genes coding for SOD, CAT, and GR, although no information is available on their mode of action on conventional cellular and humoral immune parameters. The effects of soybean derivatives and linseed oil on the immune competence of different marine fish species are presented in Table 39 ; as with the effects considered for salmonids, this should not be considered a feed additive for enhancing the immune system and fish condition but rather a collateral effect of including soybean and linseed oil in diets as alternative fish meal and fish oil sources. Consequently, the mode of action of this raw material is not further discussed in this section. Several plant-derived compounds from Uncaria tomentosa and Echinacea spp. exist which contain molecules with immunostimulant properties, such as caffeic acid derivatives, polysaccharide fractions, alkamides, quinovic acid glycosides, and pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids. However, their mode of action on the animals' condition and immune status has not been addressed in the publication exploring these compounds. Other plant-derived compounds, such as those originating from Cucurbita moshata, Lonicera japonica, Panax ginseng, Carthamus tinctorius, Plantago asiatica, Glycyrrhizaspp., Echinacea spp., Aconitum koreanum, and Oscimum sanctum have been tested in fish diets in a mixture with other additives, so their individual modes of action could not be determined. Lactoferrin administration has been described to have a direct but weak effect on leucocytes in vitro studies, whereas for in vivo studies it activates the cellular innate immune response by enhancing respiratory burst and leucocyte-mediated cytotoxic functions. These results are somehow different from those reported in salmonids and freshwater fish species, which may be due to different experimental approaches and analysed variables. This means that it is not currently possible to draw general conclusions on the impact of lactoferrin on fish. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 242 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Fish protein hydrolysates have been reported to improve the production of IgM and lysozyme activity as well as to modulate the gut microbiota; these parameters were associated with an improvement in the resistance of fish toVibrio anguillarum challenge. Antibodies (IgY from egg powder) have been tested in abalone (mollusc species) and have shown to increase the respiratory burst activity and prevent infection from Vibrio alginolyticus. No information about their use in fish and crustaceans is currently available. Studies exploring algae were the most common in this section. Regarding marine fish and shellfish species, the immune stimulant effects reported for vitamin C and E in this group of animals is similar to that reported previously in salmonids and freshwater fish species. As it did in salmonids and fresh water fish species, the use of Ergosan as a feed additive had an effect on marine fish and shellfish species. In addition, the use of different microalgae, such as N. gaditana, T. chuii, and P. tricornutum, stimulated certain activities of the gilthead sea bream immune system and slightly affected immune-related gene expression, although these effects differed among microalgae species. In particular, Phaeodactylum tricornutum has a higher enhancing effect on immune parameters, which might be attributed to the presence of a cell-wall-sulphated glucomannan and a -1,3-glucan. Microalgae increased the expression of CSF-1R and MHC-IIa genes in the gut. Dietary applications of B. subtilis, T. chuii, and P. tricornutum, on their own or in combination, may exhibit up-regulating effects on gilthead sea bream immune parameters (complement activity, IgM level, respiratory burst, and phagocytic activity). Other microalgae, such as Navicula spp. and L. sakei, have been reported to increase the humoral immune response by elevating the levels of myeloperoxidase, lysozyme, total antiproteases activities, and IgM. Regarding this type of feed additives in shrimp, data indicates that shrimp fed the Gracilaria tenuistipitata extractcontaining diets showed increased immunity by increasing circulating haemocytes, PO activity, RBs, SOD activity, GPX activity, and lysozyme activity together with increases in mitotic cells; this was correlated with an increased resistance to Vibrio alginolyticus and WSSV infections. In addition, shrimp fed with Sargassum fusiforme polysaccharide extract (SFPSE) displayed significantly lower cumulative mortalities and enhanced immune activity (THC, PO, and LSZ activities). www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 243 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Regarding minerals, the oral administration of Barodon, a commercial product (Anionic Alkali Mineral Complex), was reported to affect the membrane-associated lymphoid tissues, as well as the innate immune response, through the increase in lysozyme, MPO and SOD activities. The effects of different types of feed additives, such as amino acids (arginine, glutamine), peptides, nucleotides, and fatty acids reported in freshwater species were similar to those observed in marine fish species. In addition, the dietary administration of acidic calcium sulphate increased the phagocytic activity in hemocytes and elevated total hemocyte counts in shrimp, resulting in an increase in stress tolerance. As isomaltooligosaccharide (IMO) was tested in fish diets containing a mixture of other additives, its mode of action could not be determined. As meat producing animals, rabbits are considered a minor species; this fact could explain the limited studies conducted on immune stimulator substances/agents that are likely to being used as feed additives in rabbit diets. Additionally, in the reviewed papers, the diversity of parameters used for the evaluation of the additive effects is very high, increasing the difficulty in inferring the most useful analyte / parameter to be systematically included in controlled or field type studies. Furthermore, the reduced number of papers on rabbits (13) also means a lack of repetition which could have been helpful for the evaluation of the reproducibility (and consequently the strength) of the results under different productive conditions. As we can infer from the analysed papers, there is limited information on the effects of probiotics and prebiotics on rabbit health, and solid conclusions cannot be made at this point in time. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 244 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The total number of articles found in the systematic review using horses as a target animal is limited. Only four articles studied the effects of probiotics included in the diet of horses, and these were conducted primarily to assess the capacity of colonisation bacteria that is 'beneficial' to the intestinal tract. Lactobacillus spp. is able to colonise the intestine of foals. The worst results were founded in adult horses; the presence of this organism in the faeces of adult horses may only represent passive movement through the intestinal tract and may not be due to colonisation. Supplementing equine diets with direct-fed LAB (blend of different probiotics) had a limited effect on nutrient digestibility or reducing the risk of acidosis associated with feeding high-starch concentrates to horses. The inclusion of Saccharomyces cerevisiae in the diet did not yield statistical significance in the improvement of horses after enterocolitis. The searches only yielded two articles about prebiotics in horses. These studies assessed FOS, GOS, and AOS effects on innate immunity. FOS supplementation could be effective in reducing disruptions of the microbial populations in the equine hindgut under stressful situations, such as acute starch overload. FOS could lead to a beneficial increase in VFA production, such as butyrate. Oligosaccharides from different sources have distinct and direct immunomodulatory properties. Using a blend of prebiotics (GOS and GOS / FOS fractions) that were dependent on dose enhanced the pro-inflammatory response (TNF-) in LPS-challenged equine PBMCs. In contrast, after incubation with 2% GOS/FOS/AOS, the LPS induced inflammatory response was dose-dependently reduced. Increasing the AOS concentration in the incubations meant that the stimulatory effects of both GOS and GOS / FOS were eventually overruled by the suppressive effects of AOS. Such an activation or suppression of the immune system could be beneficial in vivo, depending on the clinical context. Only one plant extract was evaluated as a component of a mixture with other probiotics in horse feed. This blend enhanced faecal sand clearance in normal horses, but the specific activity of psyllium could not be determined. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 245 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). Two articles studied the effects of minerals on the guts of horses. Baradon (a blend of minerals) is a potential immunostimulant and alternative to antimicrobial feed additives for improving equine immune responses. Its use seems to result in the improved capability of horses to endure an attack of infectious respiratory diseases. Baradon induces higher proportions of cells expressing major histocompatibility complex class II and CD2, CD4, CD4-CD25, CD8, and CD8-CD25 T-lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and surface immunoglobulin M and B-lymphocytes in peripheral blood, as well as enhanced cell proliferative responses and increased phagocytic activity against bacteria. Conversely, Selenium status (either high or low) did not affect the ability of the horses to display an immune response to a novel antigen, with the exception of IL-10 expression. Probiotics are used in clinical practice as tools to manage animals with diarrhoea or other gastrointestinal diseases; in some cases, they are also used in healthy animals, with the hope that the result will be a healthier gastrointestinal tract and the prevention of disease. Evidence of these actually helping in such cases is relatively scarce, although these products can be found on the market both alone and in combination (synbiotics) as well as in some pet foods. As seen in the results, the effects of the additive on immunity varied depending on the probiotic used. In cats, Enterococus was the most effective (stable microbiome, lower morbility associated with feline herpes virus-1 in some cats), while both Lactobacillus and Enterococcus yielded positive results in dogs. The mode of action of these probiotics is not always described in the literature, but Lactobacillus exerted beneficial effects in dogs, in terms of cytokine expression, primarily through regulatory T-cells (up-regulation predominantly of IL-10 and to a lesser extent of TGF-1, leading to an overall decrease in the pro-inflammatory / regulatory cytokines ratio). L. casei, expressing the cGM-CSF protein, stimulates the production of monocytes and CCV-specific IgG in CCV vaccinated dogs. These also reduce ammonia formation, increase lactic acid, and reduce other bacteria (likely due to the acidification of the GI tract by lactic acid). www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 246 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). As for Enterococcus faecium in cats, there was no detectable enhancement of FHV-1 serum IgG antibody responses or lymphocyte responses to concanavalin A or FHV-1 antigens in SF68-supplemented cats. In dogs, however, they increased both Ig synthesis and TNF. The end-points measured for probiotics have several limitations. Microbiota was the most frequently studied end-point (14 articles of a total of 21); however, most canine research (particularly research sponsored by pet food companies) is non-invasive and thus faecal microbiota is the most common analysis. It is not possible to affirm that faecal microbiota is reflective of what happens in the colon or in earlier parts of the gastrointestinal tract. Other responses, such as complete blood cell count, are very difficult to interpret as they primarily fall within the reference ranges, despite any changes. The increase in Ig, especially before vaccination, is the optimal end-point regarding the effect of probiotics on immunity. However, the number of studies is small (three articles of a total of 21). Performance in pets is also difficult to measure, as pets are not used for the production of food. Health status is also rarely measured, except for diarrhoea in some cases (not defined in 16 articles out of the total of 21). Prebiotics are commonly used in pets, either separately or as part of combinations (synbiotics) or within the diet. The majority of diets include fibre sources, and some of these include prebiotic fibre sources such as chicory root (source of inulin which is, in turn, a source of FOS), sugar beet pulp, and Platago spp. The inclusion of fibre can result in better faecal quality and can promote satiation in pets, up to a certain point. In terms of immunity, the most frequently studied prebiotic is FOS, followed by MOS. Inulin (a source of FOS) and the yeast cell wall (a source of MOS) has also been studied. In cats, there is no clear result of FOS inclusion, except for an increase in Bifidobacterium. In dogs, this prebiotic (and inulin) does affect bacterial composition (mostly in faeces) and can alter the products of bacterial metabolism, reducing putrefactive compounds, and increasing propionic acid. This also increases Ig concentration in milk and colostrum, and one study indicated partial protection against infection. The mode of action is thought to be via the selective growth of beneficial bacteria, which would then act like probiotics (competing with pathogens, producing lactic acid, and affecting cytokine synthesis, etc.). As for MOS (and the yeast cell wall), in dogs these tend to increase Lactobacillus and decrease anaerobes, likely due to promoting Lactobacillus growth, which then competitively inhibits the growth of other The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). pathogenic bacteria. It also helps to manage diarrhoea due to EPEC, and this effect is likely due to the fact that MOS bind to type-1 mannose site in E. coli, preventing the bacteria from binding the enterocytes. Prebiotics, like other fibres, can result in decreased digestibility; this is a negative side effect, the degree to which will depend on the dose and may not be significant. End-points are quite restrictive in dogs and cats. Most microbiota are measured in faeces (with the aforementioned limitations; 13 articles out of a total of 17) and, as with probiotics, changes in complete blood cell count and Ig are difficult to interpret (six articles out of a total of 17). At this time, there are no clear results for Lactoferrin and plant extracts with regard to feline and canine immunity. www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 248 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 1. Articles included in this systematic search typically used the term "immunomodulation" rather than "immunostimulation". The term "modulation" does not imply an induction of an immunological parameter. The beneficial effects of dietary feed additives on animal health may be caused by down-or up-regulation of a specific immune parameter. 2. Some substances / agents included in this study have already been considered as feed additives by the European Commission. Currently, some DFM, vitamins, amino acids, minerals, and enzymes are regulated by Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, as zootechnical or nutritional additives. 3. In this revision, few interactions between dietary composition and substances / agents were noted. The main interactions studied were those between two or more immunomodulatory substances / agents added to the diet. A reduced number of studies evaluated the safety of the additives, likely because the main purpose of this systematic review was to identify efficacy rather than check the safety of substances / agents with immunomodulatory effects making them likely to be used as feed additives. A large number of reports explore mixtures with more than one immunomodulatory substance / agent. Therefore a specific mode of action identified in these studies cannot be attributed to any individual compound. 6. The mode of action of some plant extracts is poorly investigated, either because these plants were studied primarily within mixtures or because few studies are available. 7. Few studies assess the dose-response of substances / agents on immune parameters. Dosages may have a significant influence on the results and the interpretation of data. Tables of mode of action do not include specific responses to dose for each substance / agent due to a wide range of applications (i.e. route of feeding, dosage, time, age of animal). www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 249 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). 8. Minerals, amino acids, and certain vitamins are common compounds in diets. These products can only be considered as immunomodulator substances when the dosage is above the minimum requirements established. 9. Taking into account the biological properties of the substances / additives investigated, improvements in the performance of the parallel, with the end-points, are those that might be considered indicatives of animal welfare. The first remark indicates that the term "modulation" does not imply an induction of an immunological parameter. Klasing (2007) suggested that the term "stimulate" should be used only in its immunological context of causing the immune system to respond. This term is used differently by immunologists and pathologists than it is by nutritionists. For this reason, the International expert advisory panel involved in the project suggests the following definition for immunomodulatory substances / agents: "Non-nutritional and non-essential nutritional compounds / organisms that improve the protective efficacy of the intestinal innate and / or adaptive immune system under challenge and / or stress conditions excluding nutritional deficiencies." www.efsa.europa.eu/publications 258 EFSA Supporting publication 2015:EN-905 The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s). The present document has been produced and adopted by the bodies identified above as author(s). This task has been carried out exclusively by the author(s) in the context of a contract between the European Food Safety Authority and the author(s), awarded following a tender procedure. The present document is published complying with the transparency principle to which the Authority is subject. It may not be considered as an output adopted by the Authority. The European Food Safety Authority reserves its rights, view and position as regards the issues addressed and the conclusions reached in the present document, without prejudice to the rights of the author(s).  
