ea3e67b627a3710625feb5cbada2ca4ee0e04c80
Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds Supplement 35 Structural Biology Quaternary Structure



Proteins fold into stable three-dimensional shapes, or conformations, that are determined by their amino acid sequence. The complete structure of a protein can be described at four different levels of complexity: primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure. As a multitude of protein structures are rapidly being determined by X-ray crystallography and by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), it is becoming clear that the number of unique folds is far less than the total number of protein structures. Not only do functionally related proteins generally have similar tertiary structures (see below), but even proteins with very different functions are often found to share the same tertiary folds. As a consequence, structural conservation at the tertiary level is perhaps more profound than it is at the primary. The identification of the fold of a protein has therefore become an invaluable tool since it can potentially provide a direct extrapolation to function, and may allow one to map functionally important regions in the amino acid sequence. Several groups have already attempted to classify protein structures into fold families and superfamiles without focusing on function (Orengo et al., 1993; Murzin et al., 1995) . The scope of this unit is not to enumerate all the existing folds and tertiary structures determined to date, but rather to provide a comprehensive overview of some commonly observed protein fold families and commonly observed structural motifs which have functional significance. Likewise, the PDB-entry tables given in this unit provide some examples of various folds, but are not comprehensive lists. The unit is organized into sections based on both structural and functional relations. Primary structure is defined as the linear amino acid sequence of a protein's polypeptide chain. In fact, the term protein sequence is often used interchangeably with primary structure. In 1973, Chris Anfinsen demonstrated that the primary amino sequence of a protein uniquely determines the higher orders of structure for a protein and is thus of fundamental importance (Anfinsen, 1973) . It is noteworthy, however, that changes in the local biological environment of a protein molecule can sometimes perturb its three-dimensional structure. For example, interactions with ligands, substrates, or other proteins can bring about controlled conformational changes producing potentially profound effects. Furthermore, a few proteins have been found to have intrinsically unstructured regions (Wright and Dyson, 1999; Tompa, 2002) . Hence, although structural uniqueness associated with a protein sequence is a powerful principle, it can sometimes depend on the local environment and is not rigidly followed in every case. Secondary structure is defined as the local spatial conformation of the polypeptide backbone excluding the side chains. Regular secondary structures (also referred to as secondary structure elements) common to many proteins include α-helices, β-sheets, and turns (see below). They can vary widely in length, from as few as three to five residues in short helices and sheets, to over fifty residues in some coiled-coil helices (see Frequently Observed Secondary Structure Assemblies or Structural Motifs). Such structures are generally defined both by characteristic main chain φ and ψ dihedral angles (i.e., the torsion angles between backbone atoms C i-1 -N i -C i α-C i and N i -C i α-C i -N i+1 , respectively; Fig. 17 .1.1A) and by regular main chain hydrogen bonding patterns. When discussing the structure of a protein, the term topology is often used to refer to the connectivity of secondary structure elements. For example, a portion of a protein containing a β-strand connected to an α-helix and then another βstrand is said to have a βαβ topology. The complete secondary structure of a polypeptide chain is often represented in two dimensions by a topology diagram (e.g., Fig. 17. 1.1H) which shows both the connectivity and the relative orientation of neighboring secondary structure elements. Such diagrams are particularly useful in classifying β-sheets. An α-helix is formed when a protein backbone adopts a right-handed helical conformation with 3.6 residues per turn and a set of hydrogen bonds formed between the main chain carbonyl (CO) of the i th residue and the main chain NH of the (i+4) th residue (Fig. 17.1.1B) . Occasionally, hydrogen bonds are observed between residues i and i+3, resulting in a 3 10 helix. Compared to the more common α-helices, 3 10 helices are much shorter, usually comprising only one to three turns. The optimal backbone φ and ψ dihedral angles for a righthanded α-helix are −57° and −47°, while for a 3 10 helix they and −49° and −26°, respectively. β-sheets β-sheets (also referred to as β-pleated sheets) make up another major secondary structural element in proteins. A β-sheet consists of at least two β-strands, each approaching an extended backbone conformation with dihedral angles confined to the region where the φ torsion angle is between −60° and −180°, and the ψ torsion angle is between 30° and 180° (i.e., −180°<φ<−60°, 30°<ψ<180°). All main-chain CO-to-NH hydrogen bonds lie between adjacent strands (Fig 17.1.1C) . A parallel β-sheet is formed when all the sheet-forming strands run parallel to each other and in the same direction from N to C termini, whereas an antiparallel β-sheet is formed when the strands are still parallel to each other, but run in opposite directions (Fig. 17.1.1C) ; a β-sheet formed from both parallel and antiparallel strands in referred to as a mixed β-sheet. A characteristic feature of β-sheets is the right handed twist which is visible when the sheet is viewed edgeon ( Fig. 17.1.1D ). Loops and turns connect helices and βsheets in protein structures. Most turns and loops assume irregular secondary structures, but important exceptions are the type I and II reverse turns (also referred to as β-turns or β-bends), which are tight turns connecting adjacent, antiparallel β-strands. Shown in Figure  17 .1.1E, type I and II turns each have a hydrogen bond between the CO of the first residue in a turn and the NH of the fourth residue (also the last residue) in the turn. The difference between the type I and II turn is a 180° flip of the peptide plane in the middle of the turn. The type I turn is more frequently observed than the type II. The terms loops and coils generally refer to secondary structure elements that display less regular hydrogen bonding patterns than those observed in α-helices, β-sheets, and reverse turns. Tertiary structure refers to the three-dimensional arrangement of all the atoms that constitute a protein molecule. It relates the precise spatial coordination of secondary structure elements and the location of all functional groups of a single polypeptide chain. The tertiary structure of a protein can often be divided into domains-i.e., distinct compact folding units usually comprising 100 to 200 residues. Small proteins may contain a single domain, whereas larger proteins often contain multiple domains. A fold refers to a characteristic spatial assembly of secondary structure elements into a domain-like structure that is common to many different proteins. Particular folds are often, though not always, related to a certain function (e.g., nucleotide-binding folds). A structural motif is similar to a fold, but is generally smaller, tending to form the building blocks of folds. Some structural motifs (e.g., β-barrels) are observed in a vast array of unrelated proteins with many variations, while others, especially those related to a unique biochemical function (e.g., zinc fingers; see Zinc-Containing DNA-Binding Motifs), are highly conserved, generally occurring in protein domains of similar function. Highly conserved structural motifs often display a characteristic signature at their amino acid sequence level, the so-called sequence motif. Very often the term motif is used alone to refer to either a structural motif or a sequence motif. This can lead to confusion since structural motifs do not always have a unique amino acid signature. It is important to note that the terms domain, fold, and motif are often used interchangeably with blurred distinctions. This happens especially for larger, highly conserved structural motifs which may be as equally well known as a particular type of domain or fold. This section describes some structural motifs commonly observed in a wide variety of proteins. Other structural motifs of particular functional significance, such as DNA-and RNA-binding motifs, are described in later sections of this unit. Helix bundles (or helical bundles) usually refer to the packing of several helices in a nearly parallel or antiparallel orientation. In some cases the term also applies to the general packing of helices regardless of their orientation to each other. There are many examples of protein structures that contain three-, four-, or multiple-helix bundles, such as cyclin (three-helix bundle), hematopoietic cytokines (four-helix bundle), globins (six-helix bundle), and cytochrome c oxidase (22-helix bundle). Helix bundles are often distinguished by the number of helices in the bundle, the relative direction of the helices, and the characteristic twist of each helix bundle. In describing the direction of the helices in a bundle, both parallel/antiparallel and up/down terminologies are used in the literature, although the latter terms give a more precise description (Fig. 17.1.1F ). In the first convention, two helices are said to be parallel if their N-to C-terminal vectors, or peptide directions, are parallel to each other (i.e., pointing in the same direction). The opposite is referred to as antiparallel. In the up/down notation, the first helix in a bundle is defined as the 'up' helix, and all subsequent helices are assigned either 'up' or 'down' depending on whether they are parallel or antiparallel, respectively, to the first helix. In most helical bundles, the axes of individual helices are inclined to the representative axis of the entire bundle in a systematic manner, forming a twist with defined handedness that resembles a spiral. Most helix bundles carry a left-handed twist. As a special case of helix bundles, coiledcoil refers to two or more helices intertwined with each other to form a supercoiled helical structure. The helices involved in a coiled-coil configuration are normally long, with certain characteristic repeats in their amino acid sequences, and are usually parallel rather than antiparallel to each other. In most cases, the participating helices of a coiled-coil are from separate subunits but reside in a topologically equivalent part of a protein. When an antiparallel β-sheet contains only two strands connected by a single tight turn, it is termed a β-hairpin ( Fig. 17.1.1G) . A β-hairpin is usually highly twisted and less regular compared to a more extended β-sheet. In an antiparallel β-sheet assembly, four adjacent strands are sometimes arranged in a pattern similar to the repeating unit of one of the ornamental patterns used in ancient Greece. Thus, this type of strand assembly is termed a Greek key motif (Fig. 17.1.1H ). The immunoglobulin fold is one example of a fold that contains the Greek key motif. A certain arrangement of two Greek key motifs form the so-called jelly roll (Fig. 17.1.1I) . In this case, strands 1, 2, 7, and 8 form one Greek key, while strands 3, 4, 5, and 6 form the other. The eight strands fold into a nearly closed barrel shape. A characteristic feature in the topology of any β-sheet is the arrangement of all the strands in the sheet, namely the strand order within the hydrogen bonding of the sheet. This hydrogen bonding-directed strand order is also called strand connectivity. In the case of a jelly roll motif, this strand connectivity has an order of 1-2-7-4-5-6-3-8. β-sandwich β-sandwich refers to a set of β-strands arranged into two β-sheets packed face-to-face against each other ( Fig. 17.1.1J ). The two sheets can be made out of parallel, antiparallel, or mixed strands. In many β-sandwiches, the strands of the two sheets are orientated either parallel/antiparallel or approximately orthogonal to each other. A common feature in some types of β-sandwiches is strand switching, which involves an edge strand that hydrogen bonds to one sheet at its N-terminal end and the other at its C-terminal end. served in nucleotide-binding proteins (see DNA-Binding Motifs and Domains; also see RNA-Binding Structural Motifs and Domains). β-barrel β-barrels are assemblies of β-strands folded into closed barrel-like structures when viewed from the ends of the strands (Fig. 17.1.1K ). The size and shape of a barrel vary widely in protein structures. A given barrel can have as few as five strands, such as in the src homology SH3 domain (see Modular Domains Involved in Signal Transduction), or as many as 22 strands, as observed in the structures of bacterial outer membrane proteins FepA and FhuA (see β-Barrel Membrane Proteins). In addition, their strands can be arranged in parallel, antiparallel, or mixed orientations. In contrast to a β-barrel, which consists entirely of β-strands, an α/β-barrel is made out of alternating α and β structures. A typical example of an α/β-barrel fold is found in the structure of triosephosphate isomerase (TIM; see The TIM-Barrel Fold). The structure has eight repeats of an alternating unit consisting of a β-strand followed by an α-helix ( Fig.  17.1.1L ). It is organized such that the eight β-strands form an inner β-barrel which is then surrounded by eight α-helices. α/β-barrels are frequently observed in enzyme structures. β-propeller β-propellers consist of a disk-shaped circular arrangement of four to eight small β-sheets around a central tunnel (for reviews see Fulop and Jones, 1999; Jawad and Paoli, 2002) . Each blade of the propeller comprises a twisted, four-stranded antiparallel sheet with β-meander topology (i.e., one strand directly follows another, forming an array of β-hairpins; also see Lipocalins) that packs face to face with neighboring blades, commonly through hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 17.1.1M ). β-propeller blades generally align with 40-to 60-residue sequence repeats that start with either the second, third, or fourth β-strand, and continue into the next sheet for a total of four strands. Ring closure usually occurs with the N-and C-terminal β-strands coming together within the final propeller blade in an association sometimes referred to as 'molecular Velcro'. β-propeller functions vary widely and include enzymatic catalysis (e.g., collagenase, galactose oxidase, sialidase), ligand binding (e.g., tachylectin-2, haemopexin), signaling (e.g., seven-bladed G protein β-subunit), proteinprotein interaction (e.g., integrin extracellular segment), and scaffolding functions (e.g., constitutive photomorphogenic 1 (COP1) protein). Well known repeating sequence motifs observed in β-propeller proteins include the WD motif (also called WD40), the kelch motif, the RCC1 repeat, the TolB repeat, the YWTD repeat, the aspartate box, the tachylectin-2 repeat, and the tryptophan docking motif (Fulop and Jones, 1999) . The rapid growth of protein structural data along with the simultaneous growth of the World Wide Web is facilitating the assembly and posting of numerous structural biology databases for researchers throughout the world. Concurrently, web servers that provide interactive computations such as protein structure alignments, graphics-based structural analysis, and pattern matching are also being developed at a swift pace. This section summarizes several helpful bioinformatics websites that relate to protein structure, classification, and structural folds; however, due to the large number of sites available, some excellent ones are not discussed in this unit. Instead, compiled here are some representative web sites that appear suited for a broad range of researchers interested in structural biology; sites focused on more narrow topics or technical issues are not discussed. The databases are arranged into the following categories: 1. Identification and annotation of protein domains and/or folds. Describes websites that serve as databases of protein folds and motifs and also allows new protein sequences submitted by the user to be scanned for domain/motif profiles. 2. Protein structure databases. Discusses worldwide databases for protein structures and their services. 3. Molecular graphics programs for PC and Macintosh personal computers. Brief descriptions and listings of freely available graphics programs for displaying and manipulating macromolecular structures on PCs and Macintosh (Mac) computers. 4. Classification of protein structures. Databases that classify protein folds and domains by various protocols. 5. Structural alignments. Databases that provide structural alignments of proteins as well There are now numerous database projects with interactive web sites that serve to categorize proteins, or portions of proteins, according to families, domains, motifs, or even functional sites using various types of sequence clustering methods or profile matching, usually using Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). These database web sites enable the user to upload sequences to be scanned interactively for real time diagnostic classification and annotation. Most sites also allow the user to browse the site's database to view annotation on a particular type of domain or motif, including a short descriptive paragraph and key literature references, or to view the complete annotation of a particular protein in the database. Below are brief descriptions of some of the more well known databases. This database (Bairoch and Bucher, 1994; Falquet et al., 2002) is part of the ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) proteomics project (Appel et al., 1994) operated by the Swiss Institute for Bioinformatics (SIB). The PROSITE web server (http://us.expasy.org/ prosite) uses protein-sequence-profile matching to identify a wide variety of functional regions in protein sequences. In addition to some large domains, PROSITE can also scan for very short stretches of less than five residues (e.g., regions of posttranslational modifications). At the time of this writing, PROSITE included 1178 documentation entries, and 1614 different patterns, rules, and profiles/matrices. The Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool (SMART; Schultz et al., 1998; Letunic et al., 2002) specializes in identifying and annotating mobile eukaryotic protein domains. The general focus of this database is on regulatory domains and extracellular modules with little emphasis on enzymatic domains. Over 650 different domains (HMMs) are currently included in the SMART database. SMART can detect signal peptides, transmembrane regions, coiled-coils, and internal repeats as well. The SMART web site (http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de) provides numerous annotation hyperlinks for each type of domain, including the current number of proteins identified with the domain, lists of proteins containing the domain, a comprehensive sequence alignment of domain family members, a consensus sequence for the domain family, the species distribution of proteins containing the domain, the PDB entry codes (hyperlinked to PDBsum) for solved structures containing the domain, and links to the InterPro database (see below). The Pfam database is a manually curated (for the most part) collection of multiple sequence alignments and HMMs that describe various protein families (Bateman et al., 2002) . It is maintained by the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute. Approximately one-quarter of Pfam is automatically generated from the PRODOM database and is referred to as Pfam-B. Pfam is built solely from proteins within the Swis-sProt/TrEMBL protein sequence database releases. Over 5200 groups of homologous sequences are included in Pfam. They are each classified as either a family, domain, repeat, or motif. So-called nondomain regions, such as signal sequences, transmembrane regions, and coiled-coils, are also predicted through third party software. The Pfam web site (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Pfam) and its four mirror sites provide an interface for uploading sequences and searching the database. Annotations include an InterPro abstract (when available), the protein family sequence alignment, hyperlinks to the HMMs that were used, the known species distribution, and various hyperlinks (if available) to entries in other databases such as PROSITE, RCSB PDB, SCOP, HOMSTRAD, PDBsum, COGS, SYS-TERS, and InterPro. When structures are available, they can be viewed interactively on graphics programs (if installed on the user's PC or Mac) by selecting them and clicking on the Chime or RasMol web page buttons (see below for databases and software). codes. An advanced search form is also available at http: //www.rcsb.org/pdb/cgi/queryForm.cgi. From the resulting list, entries can be chosen by clicking on the EXPLORE hyperlink on the right-hand side of the page. At this point, a wealth of information is available; the following is a list of the hyperlinks available from this page (also refer to the documentation available from the web site): 1. Download/Display File. Allows downloading or displaying the coordinate file. 2. Medline. Provides the MedLine abstract of the primary publication describing the structure. 3. View Structure. Permits interactive viewing of the structure. On this page, links are available for coordinates that are formatted specifically to be parsed into interactive graphics programs such as RasMol, Chime, Swiss PdbViewer, VRML, or MICE (see below) by simply clicking on the name of the program. Links are provided on the same page that explain the downloading and installation of these programs. If there are no graphics programs installed on the user's computer, a simple Java applet called QuickPDB is also available requiring no installation. Clicking on the QuickPDB button provides a red colored wire α-carbon trace of the structure that can be rotated, translated, or magnified (zoomed) with a mouse. The protein sequence(s) is displayed as well, enabling residues to be selected by highlighting regions of the sequence. As of early 2003, QuickPDB can display only protein structures; DNA, RNA, and ligand structure display is not supported. Additionally, prearranged static images of the molecule created by RASTER3D are available in jpg and tiff formats from the View Structure web page. 4. Structural Neighbors. Clicking on this will provide links for that particular structure within the CATH, CE, FSSP, SCOP, or VAST databases (see below). 5. Geometry. This provides considerable structural analysis of the structure including outputs from WHAT CHECK and PROCHECK (comprehensive geometric analyses), PROMOTIF (secondary structure analysis), castP (pocket and cavity analysis), LPC (ligand contact analysis), and CSU (contact analysis), in addition to a Ramachandran plot, and tabulated analyses of average bond length, bond angles, and dihedral angles. 6. Sequence Details. This link includes sequence(s) from the coordinate file in FASTA format and links to sequence databases. macromolecular electron microscopy data such as volume maps, sections, structure factor files, layer-line data, figures, and textual descriptors (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd/iims/3D_EMdep .html). MMBD. The Molecular Modeling Database (MMDB; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Structure/MMDB/mmdb.shtml) is maintained by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). It is a monthly updated database containing experimentally determined macromolecular structure coordinates downloaded form the RCSB PDB (see above). Theoretical models are excluded. Using NCBI's Entrez data retrieval system, one can run key word searches to find protein structures. Searching results in a list of hyperlinked PDB entry codes with brief one-or two-line descriptions. Upon choosing a particular hyperlink, an MMDB Structural Summary is presented. From this page, several hyperlinked options are available. These include: 1. The PDB web page for that particular entry. 2. A list of related PubMed references. 3. NCBI's Taxonomy browser. 4. A three-dimensional view of the protein using NCBI's own molecular graphics program, Cn3D (obtained by clicking View 3D Structure; program must be installed locally). 5. A list of structurally homologous proteins (referred to as structural neighbors) generated by the program VAST (Vector Alignment Search Tool; obtained by clicking on the colored bar representing the protein chain or domain of interest). Superpositions of these structures with the original structure can be viewed using the Cn3D or MAGE programs. 6. Protein sequence alignments between various domains in the structure and other sequences within the same domain family from NCBI's Conserved Domain Database (CDD). High-end graphics work stations are no longer needed to view three-dimensional models of macromolecular structures or perform simple manipulations in real time. This can now be accomplished with PC or Mac personal computers running any of a variety of operating systems. Below is a sample listing from the growing inventory of personal computerfriendly molecular graphics programs that are freely available from the World Wide Web. Unless otherwise noted, each program listed runs on both PC and Mac platforms. These tity with any others in the set. Each member of the representative set represents a group of sequence homologs with >25% sequence identity. Pairwise structural alignments are made (using the Dali program) between all members of the representative set and between each representative protein and its sequence homologs. The individual alignments, complete with Ras-Mol links (see above) to view three-dimensional superpositions, color-coded sequence alignments, and various alignment statistics such as the root mean square deviation (RMSD), Z-scores, and percent sequence identity, are available on the web. These structural comparisons are used in a hierarchical clustering procedure to create a fold tree within FSSP for the classification of protein structures. A Z-score cutoff of ≥2 is used to define individual folds at the top of the hierarchy. Subsequent Z-score cutoffs of 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64 are used to designate further classification levels with increasing structural similarity. Moreover, another database, referred to as a supplement to FSSP and called the Dali Domain Dictionary (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/dali/domain), has recently been built in a very similar manner but focuses on protein domains rather than whole proteins (Dietmann and Holm, 2001) . Several databases accessible through the World Wide Web offer comprehensive collections of structural alignments between known protein structures. Some servers also allow the user to upload coordinate files for interactive structural alignments. Proper cutoff values applied to alignment parameters result in lists of structural neighbors for each entry. Three of these database servers are briefly described below. The Homologous Structure Alignment Database (HOMSTRAD) groups protein structures determined by crystallography or NMR into several hundred families according to sequence identity and provides structural alignments within the families that can be downloaded or viewed via RasMol (see above) hyperlinks (Mizuguchi et al., 1998; http://www-cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk/~homstrad) . As of early 2003, 1033 multimember families and 3187 single member families were included in the database. The Vector Alignment Search Tool (VAST) provides a systematic algorithm for aligning and comparing the three-dimensional structures of proteins (Madej et al., 1995; Gibrat et al., 1996; http://www. ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ Structure/VAST/vast.shtml) . More than 18,000 protein domains within the NCBI's Molecular Modeling Database (MMD) have been compared with each other in a pairwise fashion using VAST and are stored in an NCBI database. From these results a list of 'Structural Neighbors' has been tabulated for each domain within the MMD. The alignments of structural neighbors can be viewed using NCBI's Cn3D or the MAGE program (see above). Furthermore, the user can upload new structures using the VAST Search web page (http://www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/Structure/VAST/ vastsearch.html) to run VAST interactively and obtain a list of structural neighbors. The Combinatorial Extension (CE) web server uses a structural alignment method that involves aligning fragments of proteins and then searching for continuous paths of aligned fragment pairs (AFPs; Shindyalov and Bourne, 1998; http://cl.sdsc.edu/ce.html) . Several options available for the user are listed below. 1. Choose a protein from the PDB (see above) and scan the entire PDB or representative proteins from the PDB for structural neighbors. 2. Upload a coordinate file and scan against the PDB 3. Calculate the structural alignment between two proteins (PDB entries or user-uploaded). 4. Perform multiple sequence alignment of proteins in the PDB using a Monte Carlo-based method. The aligned structures generated can be downloaded as a PDB file or viewed interactively using RasMol (see above), Protein Explorer (requires Chime; see above), or the web site's own Java applet called Compare3D that requires no locally installed program. structure knowledge, many other proteins whose functions are not related to immunoglobulins have nonetheless been found to contain one or more Ig-like domains in their tertiary structures. Examples of such proteins include the cell surface glycoprotein receptors such as growth hormone receptor, CD4 and CD8, adhesion molecules such as cadherins and type III fibronectins, class I and class II major histocompatibility proteins, chaperone protein PapD, the transcriptional factor NF-κB, and even some enzymes such as Cu and Zn superoxide dismutase and β-galactosidase. The discovery of the Ig-like domains in many proteins not only broadens the definition of superfamily, but more importantly, demonstrates the versatility of the fold and the ability of these domains to function as modular units in many diverse systems. The immunoglobulin fold is defined as a domain that is formed from seven to nine βstrands folded into a Greek key β-sandwich ( Fig. 17. 1.2; also see above). The topology consists of one β-sheet formed by strands A, B, E, and D, while the opposing sheet is formed by strands C, C′, and occasionally C′′, as well as F and G. Based on the strand hydrogen-bonding pattern and the number of strands in each domain, the superfamily is further divided into five commonly observed subclasses: V, C1, C2, I, and E ( Fig. 17.1.2) . The V-type domain has the same topology as immunoglobulin variable (V) regions. It has nine strands with a typical strand switch occurring in the first strand, which usually breaks into two halves (A and A′) with the first half (strand A) hydrogen bonding to strand B of the B-E-D β-sheet and the second half (strand A′) hydrogen bonding to strand G of the opposing β-sheet. Strands C′ and C′′ are usually shorter than the other strands. In immunoglobulins, the antigen binding site is composed primarily of three loop regions termed complementary determining regions (CDRs). They are located between strands B and C, C′ and C′′, and F and G. The C1 type of immunoglobulin fold refers to the topology observed in the structure of constant regions of immunoglobulins. It has seven strands, of which strands A-B-E-D form one β-sheet and strands C-F-G form the other. Most members of the C2-type subclass have seven strands and differ from the C1 type by a simple switch whereby strand D hydrogen bonds with strand C in the C-F-G sheet rather than strand E in the A-B-E sheet. Hence strand D is labeled C′ in the C2-type subclass. Some members of the C2 family also have additional strands at either the N or C termini. Based on tertiary structure similarities, there are two frequently adopted tertiary folds in the C2 class; one is similar to the C2 domain of T-lymphocyte cell surface glycoproteins CD2 and CD4, while the other is similar to the fibronectin type III domain, and hence is also referred to as the fibronectin type III-like fold, shown as C2(Fn) in Figure 17 .1.2C. The I-type domains closely resemble the topology of immunoglobulinvariable domains except that they lack strands C′ and C′′. The members of the I-type subclass also have the characteristic strand switching phenomena in the first strand, as do the immunoglobulin variable domains. The E-type immunoglobulin domains also present a topology similar to those of the V type with the difference being the lack of C′′ and D strands. Among the members of the immunoglobulin superfamily, occasionally, additional strands are observed at the N and C termini and sometimes insertion strands which lie outside the core immunoglobulin fold can be found connecting the adjacent immunoglobulin strands. The three-dimensional structures of class I and class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules reveal a distinct fold associated with the peptide-binding domain. In addition to MHC molecules, the structures of neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), hereditary haemochromatosis protein HFE, MHC-I chain homolog (MIC), UL16 binding protein (ULBP), and Rae-1 have all been shown to contain an MHC-like fold (Radaev et al., 2001b; Boyington and Sun, 2002) . MHC molecules are heterodimers consisting of an α/β peptide-binding domain and two Ig C1-type domains ( Fig. 17.1.3) . In class I MHC molecules, the peptide-binding α1α2 domain and the α3 Ig domain reside on one chain (the heavy chain), while the second Ig domain is contributed by an associated β2m molecule ( Fig.  17.1.3A ). Class II MHC molecules consist of an α and β chain ( Fig. 17.1.3B ). The N-terminal part of each chain contributes to half of the peptide-binding domain and the C-terminal half of each chain provides a single Ig domain. The MHC Ig domains all have Ig C1-type folds (see Immunoglobulins and Immunoglobulin-Like Superfamilies). In class I MHC molecules, the peptide-binding domain is formed by the α1 and α2 regions of the heavy chain whereas in class II molecules it is formed by the α1 and β1 regions of both α and β chains. The peptidebinding domain consists of two α-helices (one from each region), forming the two sides of the groove and an eight-stranded antiparallel βsheet (four strands from each region), forming the floor of the groove (Fig. 17.1.3C ). The size of the groove is ∼30 Å long and 12 Å wide in the middle. Both class I and II MHC molecules bind peptides in extended conformations with anchor residues buried inside pockets of the groove. The distribution of these pockets along the binding site determines the peptide selectivity of a particular allele of class I or class II molecules. Class I MHC molecules are restricted to binding peptides of 8 to 11 residues, whereas class II MHC molecules bind longer peptides of 15 to 24 residues. In contrast, none of the MHC-like proteins, such as FcRn, HFE, MICs, ULBPs, and Rae-1s associate with peptides. Their putative peptide-binding grooves are narrower or even closed compared to the MHC peptide-binding groove (Table 17. 1.1). In addition to immunoglobulin-like superfamilies, many recently identified immunoreceptors are members of the C-type lectin-like superfamily. Examples include mannose-binding protein, FcεRII (CD23), CD94, members of NKG2 family receptors, Ly49 receptors, and DC-SIGN. Their structures resemble that of C-type lectin, a calcium-dependent carbohydrate-binding protein (see C-type Lectins). What is unique to many of these C-type lectinlike receptors is the absence of a functional calcium-binding site and their ability to form a common disulfide-bonded dimer (Boyington et al., 1999) .  The goal of structural immunology in recent years has been to define molecular structures of immunoreceptor-ligand complexes rather than revealing new protein folds. The notable milestones include the publications of several T cell receptors and their cognate MHC-peptide complexes (Garboczi et al., 1996; Garcia et al., 1998; Reinherz et al., 1999) -i.e., T cell coreceptor CD8 or CD4 and their class I or II MHC complexes (Gao et al., 1997; Wang et al., 2001) , T cell coreceptor CTLA-4 and ligand B7 complex (Stamper et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2001) , NK cell killer immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) and its MHC ligand complexes (Fan et al., 2001; Boyington et al., 2000) , NK cell activating receptor NKG2D and its ligand complexes Radaev et al., 2001b; Li et al., 2002b) , and Fc receptors in complex with their Fc ligands (Garman et al., 2000; Radaev et al., 2001a; Sondermann et al., 2000) . The complement system is composed of a large number of plasma proteins which participate in an innate immune response to bacteria. Antibodies, mannose-binding lectins, or other complement components binding to the bacterial cell surface can initiate a cascade of complement reactions ultimately leading to recruitment of inflammatory cells, and the opsonization and killing of bacterial pathogens. The following section reviews the structural folds of fragments of several complement components (Table 17 .1.2). Complement protein C3 is a central component in the opsonization of bacteria. One of its natural cleavage products, C3dg can act as a ligand for the B cell receptor CR2 (CD21) when covalently attached to the pathogen surface. The three-dimensional structure of C3d, a protease-resistant fragment (residues 996 to 1303) of C3dg, reveals an α/α barrel composed of twelve α helices (Fig. 17.1.4; Nagar et al., 1998) . The barrel is composed of two concentric rings of six α helices each. Each ring is made of parallel helices inclined slightly from the main axis of the barrel. The topology of the molecule causes consecutive helices to alternate from outside to inside with the orientation of the outer ring helices antiparallel to those of the inner ring. This same fold is also observed in enzymes such as glucoamylase, endoglucanase, and the β subunit of protein farnesyltransferase. The three residues essential for covalent attachment to the pathogen, Cys17 (mutated to Ala in the crystal structure to avoid incorrect disulfide bond formation), Gln20, and His133, are situated at the rim of one end of the barrel (right panel of Fig. 17.1.4A ). C5a is a 74-residue glycoprotein derived from C5 and is very potent in mediating local inflammatory responses within the complement cascade. The solution NMR structures show a five α helix antiparallel bundle (Fig. 17.1.4B; Zhang et al., 1997) . Mutational analysis indicates that the C-terminal twelve residues, including the C-terminal helix, contribute . Complement factor D is a serine protease which cleaves complement factor B only when complexed with C3b. The crystal structure shows a typical trypsin fold (see Protease Folds) consisting of two nearly identical sixstranded antiparallel β barrels with Greek key topology (see above), two flanking α helices, and an active site situated between the two barrels ( Fig. 17.1.4C ; Narayana et al., 1994) . The active site is very unusual in that the Asp and His residues of the canonical Asp-His-Ser triad are misoriented from the conformation that is favorable for catalytic activity of a serine protease. It is proposed that complement factor D activity is regulated by a reversible inducedfit mechanism which activates the enzyme only in the presence of its natural substrate, factor B/C3b. Mutation and X-ray studies indicate that three residues, Ser 94, Thr 214, and Ser 215 are responsible for the altered conformation of the active site relative to other serine proteases (Kim et al., 1995a) . CD59 (also known as MEM-43, MIRL, H19, MACIF, HRF20, and protectin) is a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored glycoprotein that functions as a potent inhibitor of complement-mediated cell lysis and may also play a role in T-cell activation. CD59 belongs to a group of cysteine-rich cell surface molecules known as the Ly6 superfamily which includes the urokinase plasminogen activator receptor, mouse thymocyte antigen ThB, and murine Ly6 antigens. Two NMR solution structures of the extracellular portion (residues 1 to 70) of the protein reveal a disk-shaped molecule with five disulfide bridges comprising a threeand two-stranded antiparallel β-sheet abutting each other, and a two-turn α-helix packed against one side of the larger β-sheet (Fig. 17.1.4D; Fletcher et al., 1994; Kieffer et al., 1994) . This structure is also very similar to those of snake venom toxins (see Small Single-Subunit Toxins) with which the Ly6 superfamily shares sequence homology. Complement control protein (CCP) modules, also known as complement protein (CP) modules, short consensus repeats (SCRs), or sushi repeats, are small domains of ∼60 amino acids containing four invariant cysteines form-ing intramodule disulfide bridges and several other highly conserved residues. These modules are present in tandem arrays in many complement regulatory proteins in addition to a number of cell surface proteins. Three-dimensional structures have been determined for the fifth, fifteenth, and sixteenth CCP domains of factor H, CCP modules 3 and 4 of a Vaccinia virus complement control protein mimic, and CCP modules 1 and 2 from the complement cofactor CD46 (Table 17. 1.2; Norman et al., 1991; Barlow et al., 1992 Barlow et al., , 1993 Wiles et al., 1997; Casasnovas et al., 1999) . The domain structure consists of an elongated, twisted βsandwich formed from a three-or four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet and a two-stranded antiparallel β-sheet ( Fig. 17.1.4E ). Although the known structures of SCR modules all have essentially the same backbone fold, differences in the number of β strands between various modules arise from differences in hydrogen bonding patterns. Structures containing two tandem CCPs show an elongated head to tail arrangement with elbow angles that vary significantly from structure to structure. Members of the hematopoietic cytokines possess a common four-helix bundle topology in their structures. The four helices (labeled a, b, c, d) always pack in a left-handed up-updown-down manner, with helices a and b, and c and d forming two pairs of parallel helices juxtaposed in opposite directions (Sprang and Bazan, 1993; Wlodawer et al., 1993) . The position of the four helices and the packing angles between them are generally well conserved. The superfamily is further divided into longchain, short-chain, and interferon (IFN) γ-like families of cytokines. Long-chain family. Members in this family include growth hormone (GH), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), erythropoietin (EPO), leukemia inhibiting factor (LIF), IL-6, IL-12 α-chain, leptin, and ciliary neurotrophic factor. The four helices of this family are each ∼25-residues long ( Short-chain family. The short-chain family includes most of the interleukins (i.e., , granulocyte/macrophage-colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), macrophage-colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF), and stem-cell factor (SCF). The helices are shorter and uneven in length (eight to fifteen amino acids long) compared to members of the long-chain family. Another signature characteristic of short-chain hematopoietic cytokines is the presence of a pair of short, twisted antiparallel β-strands, one in the loop connecting helices a and b, and the other in the loop connecting helices c and d (Fig. 17.1.5B and D) . Many of them also have disulfide bridges in their structures; however, the locations of these disulfide bonds are not well conserved. Interferon γ-like. This family includes IFNγ and IL-10. Both contain six helices (a, b, c, d, e, and f) and function as homodimers (Ealick et al., 1991; Zdanov et al., 1995) . The dimerization is particularly interesting in this family. The two domains of the dimer are formed by swapping the last two helices (e and f) between the two monomers. The four-helix bundle forming helices in each domain are made out of helices a, c, and d from one monomer, and helix f from the other (Fig. 17 .1.5C and E). Members of the β-trefoil family include not only cytokines such as interleukin-1α, interleukin-1β, and fibroblast growth factor, but also proteins such as soybean trypsin inhibitor, ricin B, amaranthin, and hisactophilin, which display the same fold (Priestle et al., 1989; Graves et al., 1990; Clore and Gronenborn, 1991; Eriksson et al., 1991; Zhang et al., 1991; Zhu et al., 1991) . The overall structure is a sixstranded closed β-barrel (A-D-E-H-I-L) sitting atop three β-hairpins (B-C, F-G and J-K). The β-trefoil has internal pseudo three-fold symmetry ( Fig. 17 .1.6A) relating three four-stranded antiparallel β-sheets. Each β-sheet is made of four consecutive strands. For example, the three β-sheets of IL-1β are comprised of strands L-A-B-C, D-E-F-G, and H-I-J-K, respectively. The recently solved crystal structures of four different growth factors, nerve growth factor (NGF), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), have revealed a common overall topology among these functionally diverse protein families (Daopin et al., 1993; Murray-Rust et al., 1993; Murzin et al., 1995; Sun and Davies, 1995) . These proteins share very little sequence homology. Nevertheless, they all have an unusual arrangement of six cysteines that are disulfide linked to form a knotted conformation and this core structure, the cystine-knot, is flanked by four strands of an antiparallel β-sheet (McDonald et al., 1991; Oefner et al., 1992; Daopin et al., 1993; Schlunegger and Grutter, 1993; Lapthorn et al., 1994; Wu et al., 1994) . Fig. 17 .1.6B shows the crystal structure of human TGF-β2 with the common flanking β-strands (1, 2, 3, and 4) shown in green and the six disulfidelinked cysteines shown in ball-and-stick models. Outside the four structurally conserved β-strands, the helices and loops observed in the structure of TGF-β2 are not conserved in NGF, PDGF, and hCG. The three disulfide bonds are formed between the six cysteines of TGF-β2 as follows: Cys 15-Cys 78, Cys 44-Cys 109, and Cys 48-Cys 111, creating a linkage pattern of I-IV, II-V, and III-VI among the six cysteines. A topological knot is formed by threading disulfide I-IV through a ring formed with disulfides II-V and III-VI as its two sides, and the peptides in between cystine II and III, and V and VI as its other two sides. Another common structural feature among the cystine-knot cytokines is that the active forms of these proteins are always dimers, either homo-or heterodimers; however, despite the overall topological similarity between the monomers, each family of growth factors form their own distinct dimers with a unique dimer interface that is characteristic to each family of growth factors. ines in sequence. They are potent chemotactic activators for neutrophils (CXC type), monocytes, and lymphocytes (CC type). The structures of several of these chemokines are available, such as interleukin 8 (IL-8; Baldwin et al., 1990; Clore et al., 1990) of the CXC type and neutrophil-activating peptide-2 (NAP-2) of the CXC type (Malkowski et al., 1995) , as well as the macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β), RANTES, and monocyte and chemoattractant proteins (MCP-1 and -3) of the CC type (Table 17. 1.3; Lodi et al., 1994; Skelton et al., 1995; Handel and Domaille, 1996; Lubkowski et al., 1997) . The two disulfide bonds are formed between the four conserved cysteines in a pattern of I-III and II-IV. Both subfamilies of chemokine are composed of dimeric proteins which share the same structural fold at the monomer level, but they differ drastically in their dimerization ( Fig. 17.1.6D ). The basic fold consists of a C-terminal α-helix packing against a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet. The CXC chemokines dimerize on the edge of the first β-strand, forming an extended six stranded antiparallel β-sheet with the two C-terminal helices packing on one side of the sheet. In contrast, the CC chemokines form the dimer using their N-terminal loop region, resulting an elongated dimer with the β-sheets of the monomers opposing each other (  The structure of a human 55 kDa tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor shows a unique fold consisting of four homologous cysteine repeat domains (Banner et al., 1993) . There are no helices and very few regular β-sheets in its secondary structure (Fig. 17.1.7A) . Instead, the fold is composed mostly of loops and β-hairpins. Upon complex formation with TNF, there are three receptor molecules symmetrically bound to a TNF trimer. In addition to TNF, the structure of a TNFassociated protein, TRAF2 (Park et al., 1999) , and the structure of a TNF receptor superfamily member, TRAIL, as well as a TRAIL-DR5 complex (Cha et al., 1999; Mongkolsapaya et al., 1999) have also been determined. The structures of the ligand-binding domains for several cystine-knot growth factor receptors have been solved to date. They in-clude a type II murine activin receptor (ActRII; Greenwald et al., 1999) , a type I human bone morphogenic protein receptor (BRIA; Kirsch et al., 2000) , a type II human transforming growth factor receptor (TBRII; Fig. 17.1.7B; Hart et al., 2002) , the TrkA subunit of a human nerve growth factor (Wiesmann et al., 1999) , and domain 2 of a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor, Flt-1 (Wiesmann et al., 1997; Table 17.1.3) . Two of these, TrkA and Flt-1, are tyrosine kinase receptors, whereas the other three are serine/threonine kinase receptors. Structurally, the ligand-binding domains of TrkA and Flt-1 are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily whereas the ligandbinding domains of ActRII, BRIA, and TBRII display a characteristic three-finger toxin fold. The latter three are also part of the so-called TGF-β receptor superfamily. The nuclear receptor superfamily is composed of steroid receptors, the thyroid hormone receptor, retinoic-acid receptor, and a number of orphan receptors (Weatherman et al., 1999) . All have two domains, an N-terminal DNAbinding domain that functions as a transcription activator, and a C-terminal ligand-binding domain that is specific for different ligands. The DNA-binding domain, rather conserved among the members of the nuclear-receptor superfamily, uses two Zn finger motifs to recognize short DNA repeats (see DNA-Binding Motifs and Domains). The ligand-binding domain is more variable than the DNA-binding domain, but nevertheless displays a similar fold of mostly α-helical segments among its members. To date, the ligand-binding domains of thyroid hormone receptor (TR; Fig. 17 .1.7C; Darimont et al., 1998) , retinoic-acid receptor (RAR; Renaud et al., 1995) , estrogen receptor (ER; Shiau et al., 1998) , progesterone receptor (PR; Williams and Sigler, 1998) , and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR; Xu et al., 2002) have been determined (Table 17.1.3) . Importin-α and -β, also known as karyopherin-α and -β, are nuclear import receptors that recognize nuclear localization signals and bind and transport proteins from the cytoplasm to the nucleus through the nuclear pore complex. The structures of importin-α and -β consist of homologous ARM and HEAT repeats (Table 17.1.3; Conti et al., 1998; Chook and Blobel, 1999; Cingolani et al., 1999; Kobe, 1999) . The structural fold of ARM and HEAT repeats are reviewed in the section below (see Modular Domains Involved in Signal Transduction). The structures of the I-domain from CD11b and CD11a integrin α-chains show that these domains possess a flavodoxin-like fold similar to members of the dinucleotide-binding family of proteins Qu and Leahy, 1995) . The tertiary structure consists of a sixstranded mostly parallel β-sheet with only one antiparallel strand on one edge of the sheet (Fig.  17 .1.7D; Table 17.1.3). The connectivity of the strands follows a 3-2-1-4-5-6 order. Flanking the central β-sheet are several α-helices on each side. A bound divalent metal ion at the end of the β-sheet is postulated to play an important role in its activity. The structure of an intact αVβ3 integrin exhibits a multidomain organization of the molecule . The adhesion domain consists of a β-propeller domain from the αV-chain and the I-domain from the β3-chain. Following the adhesion domain, the αV-chain has three immunoglobulin-like domains, whereas the β3-chain possess four EGF-like modules. β-catenins are cytosolic proteins essential for cell adhesion and signal transduction. The structure of β-catenin consists of a central domain of twelve armadillo (ARM) repeats (see Modular Domains Involved in Signal Transduction), which mediate binding to cadherins and Tcf family transcription factors (Graham et al., 2000; Huber and Weis, 2001) . The cysteine-rich domain of the scavenger receptor is a conserved domain of 110 amino acids. It is found widely in cell surface receptors and secreted proteins that participate in innate immune functions. The structure of a scavenger receptor cysteine-rich domain (SRCR) from the Mac-2 binding protein has been determined (Hohenester et al., 1999) . The fold consists of a curved six-stranded β-sheet cradling an α-helix. There are three conserved disulfide bonds ( Fig. 17  Glutamate is an important neurotransmitter of mammalian central nervous systems mediating long-term potentiation/depression, learning, and memory. There are two forms of glu-tamate receptors, the metabotropic (mGluR) and ionotropic (iGluR) glutamate receptors. While metabotropic glutamate receptors are members of G-protein-coupled seven transmembrane receptors, ionotropic glutamate receptors contain ligand-gated channels. The structures of the extracellular ligand-binding domains of mGluR and iGluR are similar (Armstrong et al., 1998; Kunishima et al., 2000) , with two domains each assuming an α/β fold topology (Fig. 17  Transferrin receptors (TfR) facilitate iron uptake in vertebrates by binding to iron-loaded transferrins on the cell surface, and then internalizing and releasing the iron in an endosome. The TfR-bound apo-transferrin then recycles to the cell surface where it is exchanged with iron-bound transferrin. The crystal structure of a human TfR shows a receptor dimer with each monomer consisting of three domains (Fig. 17.1.7G; Lawrence et al., 1999) . The first protease-like domain has a fold similar to that of the carboxy-or aminopeptidases with a central seven-stranded β-sheet flanked by α-helices. The second apical domain folds into a β-sandwich similar to domain four in aconitase. The third domain is all α-helical and forms an irregular four-helical bundle (  Domains that bind phosphotyrosine SH2 domains. SH2 domains were initially identified in the oncoprotein v-Fps, and subsequently in the Src and Abl tyrosine kinases (Pawson et al., 2001) . The name is derived from the designation Src homology domain 2. The function of this module is to bind phosphotyrosine peptides (Table 17 .1.4). Through this very specific phosphorylation-dependent interaction, various types of cellular signaling processes can be controlled, such as enzyme regulation, sequestering or recruiting of specific proteins, linking proteins together through adaptor molecules, and protein multimerization. Most SH2 domains are involved in some aspect of the cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase signaling pathways (for reviews of the SH2 domain, see Kuriyan and Cowburn, 1997; Pawson et al., 2001) . Examples of proteins with SH2 domains include protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs), phosphatases (PTPases), a subunit of phospholipase C (PLC-γ1), the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3OH kinase, the cytoplasmic tail of cell surface receptor proteins, and adaptor proteins like Grb2; however, as of this writing, the total number of SH2-containing proteins is well over 1100 according to the SMART database (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/ browse.shtml) . The fold of the ∼100 residue SH2 domain is characterized by an α/β barrel-like sandwich with a central core formed by a four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet followed by a smaller three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet ( Fig.  17.1.8A ). The β-barrel is flanked by two α-helices, one on each side of the larger β-sheet (Booker et al., 1992; Overduin et al., 1992; Waksman et al., 1992) . A phosphopeptidebinding site is located on a surface formed by the fourth strand of the central β-sheet, the first helix, the loop between strands 5 and 6, and the loop at the end of helix 2. The phosphate moiety of the phosphotyrosine forms an ion pair with an arginine residue from the second strand of the central β-sheet. Another arginine from the first helix and a lysine from strand 4 appear to have favorable interaction with the phosphotyrosine ring. The peptide binding specificity of SH2 domains are defined largely by amino acids at the +1, +2, and +3 site of the phosphotyrosine peptide. PTBs. Phosphotyrosine-binding domains (PTBs), also known as protein-interaction domains (PIs), function as signaling domains which bind to proteins containing the consensus sequence Asn-Pro-X-(pTyr/Tyr). For reviews, see Yaffe (2002b) and Yan et al. (2002) . Most PTBs target sequences with a phosphorylated tyrosine; however, some recognize nonphosphorylated sequences. Furthermore, some PTB domains are reported to recognize peptide ligands containing no tyrosine residue or even phospholipid ligands (Yaffe, 2002b; Yan et al., 2002) . Despite functional diversity within this family, structural homology is strongly conserved and many members display very high ligand specificity. The PTB fold consists of a seven-stranded antiparallel β-sandwich flanked by an α-helix ( Fig. 17. 1.8B; Zhou et al., 1995 Zhou et al., , 1996 Eck et al., 1996) . Remarkably, this is the same fold observed for the pleckstrin homology (PH) domain and the EVH1 domain (see Polyproline Binding Domains). In the case of the PTB domain, the peptide ligand generally forms an additional β-strand between β-strand 5 and the α-helix, essentially extending the second βsheet (Yan et al., 2002) . First identified in the adaptor protein SCH (Blaikie et al., 1994; Kavanaugh and Williams, 1994; van der Geer et al., 1995) and the insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1; Gustafson et al., 1995) , over 430 PTB domains are now listed in the SMART database (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/browse.shtml) . Forkhead-associated domains (FHA) . The forkhead-associated domain (FHA) is a small modular phosphothreonine-binding domain widely found, from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, in numerous types of multidomain proteins, including transcription factors, kinases, phosphatases, kinesins, RNA-binding proteins, and some metabolic enzymes (Li et al., 2000; Durocher and Jackson, 2002) . Initially identified by Hofmann and Bucher (1995) in the family of forkhead-associated transcription factors, this domain has since been found on over 400 different proteins (http://smart.embl-heidelberg. de/browse.shtml). In addition to recognizing phosphothreonine, some FHA domains are reported to bind phosphotyrosine (Liao et al., 1999; Wang et al., 2000a) or even unphosphorylated peptides (Li et al., 2002a) . The structure of the FHA domain ( Fig. 17.1 .8C) comprises a ∼100 residue eleven-stranded β-sandwich (Liao et al., 1999; Durocher et al., 2000; Wang et al., 2000a) . Some FHA domains have small helices within the loop regions as well. Structurally, this domain is most closely related to the MH2 domain of the SMAD family that also functions as a protein interaction module. Interestingly, the FHA fold includes nearly twice as many residues as the 55-to 75-amino acid FHA homology region initially studied. This FHA homology region covers only β-strands 3 to 10 on one face and includes the ligand recognition site (Durocher and Jackson, 2002) . The phosphothreonine-containing peptide ligand binds in an extended conformation across three loops (β3/4, β4/5 and β6/7) along the end of one face of the β-sandwich. 14-3-3 proteins. 14-3-3 proteins constitute a large array of multifunctional phosphoserine/phosphothreonine-binding proteins that play significant roles in signal transduction for numerous eukaryotic-cell processes, including regulation of gene expression, cell-growth control, apoptosis, and neuronal development (Fu et al., 2000b; Yaffe, 2002a) . Many different types of proteins are targeted by 14-3-3 proteins, including kinases, acetylases, acetyl transferases, hydroxylases, cell surface recep-tors, cytoskeletal and scaffolding proteins, small G-proteins, and transcription factors. Indeed over 100 different proteins have been reported to interact with 14-3-3 proteins (Yaffe, 2002a) . The name 14-3-3 refers to the elution position of these proteins from a DEAE cellulose column and the subsequent gel electrophoresis migration pattern during isolation from bovine brain by Moore and Perez in 1967. 14-3-3 proteins are relatively abundant, acidic proteins found in eukaryotic organisms from fungi to plants and mammals. In mammals, seven different isoforms have been characterized, referred to as β, γ, ε, η, σ, τ, and ζ. They function as homo-and heterodimers with a monomeric molecular weight of ∼30 kDa. The first three-dimensional structures of 14-3-3 determined in 1995 revealed a crescent shaped dimer ( Fig. 17.1.8D ) composed of a bundle of antiparallel α-helices (nine per monomer; Liu et al., 1995; Xiao et al., 1995) . The inner concave surface (or central channel) is more negatively charged and more highly conserved than the outer surface. Subsequent crystal structures of peptide-ligand complexes revealed an amphipathic binding groove in each monomer within the central channel that binds peptides in an extended conformation (Yaffe, 2002a) . The recent crystal structure of 14-3-3 ζ complexed with serotonin N-acetyltransferase bound to a bisubstrate analog in addition to isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and activity studies provide intriguing evidence that 14-3-3 binding structurally modulates serotonin N-acetyltransferase such that substrate binding affinity and activity increase (Obsil et al., 2001) . Thus, 14-3-3 proteins are not simply protein interaction domains, but can also regulate enzymatic activity. SH3 domains. SH3 (src homology 3) domains are protein interaction modules of 50 to 75 residues that recognize proline-rich sequences. Like SH2 domains, SH3 domains are perhaps best known for their role in the regulation of tyrosine kinases; however, they are also found in numerous other proteins, including the adaptor proteins Grb2 and Crk, as well as PTPases such as the γl subunit of phopholipase C (PLC-γl), certain cytoskeletal proteins such as myosin-1B and fodrin, and the yeast actinbinding protein ABP-1. The SMART database now lists over 2200 proteins containing SH3 domains (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg. de/browse.shtml). The core of an SH3 domain consists of two perpendicular antiparallel β-sheets folded into a β-barrel like structure. One sheet is formed with strands B, C, and D, the other with A and E ( Fig. 17. 1.9A; Musacchio et al., 1992; Yu et al., 1992) . The relatively flat, nonpolar recognition site is formed primarily by two loops of variable length, one between strand A and B (the so-called RT loop), and one between B and C (the so-called n-Src loop). The core binding motif is Φ-Pro-X-Φ-Pro, where Φ is a hydrophobic residue and x is any residue. Each of the ΦP dipeptides occupies a conserved hydrophobic binding pocket. An interesting feature of the SH3 domain is that it recognizes its ligands in either of two orientations, depending on the placement of positively charged specificity residues flanking the Φ-Pro-X-Φ-Pro sequence. For reviews detailing the structural and functional aspects of SH3 domains see Cesareni et al. (2002) , Cowburn (1997), and Mayer (2001) . WW domains. WW domains (also known as WWP or rsp5 domains) are very small modules consisting of only 35 to 40 residues folded into a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet (Fig. 17.1.9B; Macias et al., 1996) . As its name suggests, this domain contains a pair of signature tryptophan residues spaced ∼20 to 22 residues apart. Additionally, there is a highly conserved proline three residues beyond the second tryptophan. WW domains have been observed throughout eukaryotes, including fungi, plants, nematodes, and various vertebrates. They function specifically in binding proline-rich sequences and have been classified into four groups based on ligand specificity. Group I domains bind to PPxY-containing sequences, group II bind PPLP sequences, group III bind polyproline sequences flanked by Arg or Lys, and group IV domains bind to ligands containing phospho-(S/T)P. Structural solutions of several ligand complexes show that the polyproline ligand interacts with the convex face of the β-sheet. For reviews, see Macias et al. (2002) and Sudol and Hunter (2000) . EVH1 domains. Enabled/vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein homology 1 (EVH1) domains (also known as WH1 domains) are protein-interaction modules critical for a diverse array of signal transduction pathways related to actin cytoskeleton remodeling (Ball et al., 2002) . EVH1 domains of ∼115 residues are widely present in eukaryotic species from fungi to mammals and are generally part of large multidomain proteins. The EVH1 fold comprises a small seven-stranded antiparallel β-sandwich flanked by a C-terminal α-helix (Fig. 17.1.9C; Fedorov et al., 1999; Prehoda et al., 1999) . Interestingly, this fold closely resembles both the pleckstrin homology (PH) and phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domains. EVH1 domains function by recognizing and targeting ligands containing the polyproline consensus sequence Phe-Pro-Pro-Pro-Pro; however, based on ligand specificity, EVH1 domains can be divided into class I proteins that recognize the sequence Phe-Pro-X-Φ-Pro, (X represents any residue and Φ represents a hydrophobic residue) and class II proteins that recognize the sequence Pro-Pro-X-X-Phe (Ball et al., 2002) . The peptide ligand binds across the concave surface formed by β-strands 1, 5, 6, and 7. PH and PTB domains also bind their ligands on this same face of the β-sandwich, albeit in different regions (Fedorov et al., 1999) . GYF domains. The GYF domain was first identified in CD2BP2, a signaling protein that binds to a proline-rich region of the cytoplasmic tail of the T cell adhesion protein CD2 (Nishizawa et al., 1998) . The SMART database now lists 54 occurrences of GYF domains including sequences from fungi, plants, and metazoans (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg. de/browse.shtml) . The NMR solution structure of the C-terminal 62 residues of Drosophila CD2BP2 reveals a small four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet adjacent to a small α-helix ( Fig. 17. 1.9D; Freund et al., 1999) . NMR and mutational data suggest that the binding site is centered around the highly conserved triplet Gly-Tyr-Phe situated in the loop between the α-helix and the third β-strand (Freund et al., 1999) . Hence, this domain has been named the GYF domain. PH domains. Pleckstrin homology (PH) domains are modules of ∼100 amino acids that are present in a wide range of signaling proteins, including many kinases, isoforms of phospholipase C, GTPases, GTPase-activating proteins, and nucleotide-exchange factors. The majority of characterized PH domains recognize and bind phosphoinositides or inositol phosphates. Indeed, most PH domains are part of membrane-associated proteins and it has been suggested that PH domains function as membrane adaptors, targeting proteins to specific membranes (Hurley and Misra, 2000; Maffucci and Falasca, 2001) ; however, recent evidence suggests that some PH domains, such as those of the β-adrenergic receptor kinase (β-ARK), the TecII tyrosine kinase, insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1), and the Etk tyrosine kinase, may bind protein ligands (see Maffucci and Falasca, 2001, and references therein) . Each PH domain folds into a seven-stranded antiparallel β-sandwich flanked by a C-terminal long α-helix at one edge of the sandwich (Downing et al., 1994; Ferguson et al., 1994; Macias et al., 1994; Yoon et al., 1994) . Strands A, B, C, and D form one sheet of the β-sandwich while strands E, F, and G form the other (Fig.  17.1.10A ). The identified IP 3 binding site is located at the two loop regions, loop AB (the loop between strand A and B ) and CD (the loop between strand C and D), opposite of the long helix. The basic PH fold has also been observed in PTB and EVH1 domains and the Pan-binding domain, despite the fact that these domains have no sequence homology with the PH domain. This has led to its reference by some as the PH superfold (Blomberg et al., 1999) . C1 domains. The C1 domain is a cysteinerich compact structure of ∼50 residues. It was first identified as a conserved region of protein kinase C (PKC) isozymes that binds diacylglycerol (DAG) and phorbol esters and participates in allosteric regulation. Since then, several hundred C1 domains have been found in other proteins. Not all of these bind DAG but may instead bind proteins or other lipids. For reviews, see Cho (2001) and Hurley and Misra (2000) . Structurally, the C1 domain ( Fig. 17 .1.10B) comprises a two-stranded β-sheet, a threestranded β-sheet, a small α-helix and two bound Zn 2+ ions (Hommel et al., 1994; Zhang et al., 1995) . Each Zn 2+ ion is coordinated by three Cys and one His side chain. The DAG/phorbol ester binding site is situated at one end of the molecule in a region surrounded by hydrophobic residues. A belt of basic residues abuts this region, encircling the middle part of the molecule. C2 domains. C2 domains were initially identified as a Ca 2+ -binding conserved homology region of protein kinase C (PKC) isozymes. To date, however, C2 domains have been observed in over 1600 different proteins according to the SMART database (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart. embl-heidelberg.de/browse.shtml), most of which function in signal transduction or membrane trafficking (see Cho, 2001, and Misra, 2000 for reviews). The majority bind membrane phospholipids in a Ca 2+ -dependent manner; however, not all require Ca 2+ and some domains bind proteins as well. The structure of C2 domains consists of ∼130 residues folded into an eight-stranded β-sandwich with topologies resembling an Ig fold (Fig.17.1.10C and Fig. 17.1.2, respectively; Sutton et al., 1995; Grobler and Hurley, 1997) . Although the β-strands are consistently in the same location, two different circularly permuted C2 domain topologies are observed. The first β-strand (strand a) in synaptotagmin-like C2 domains becomes the last β-strand in the phospholipase C-like C2 domains. The rest of the topology is identical between various C2 domains. Three variable loops at one end of the domain, referred to as Ca 2+ -binding regions (CBRs), are intimately involved in the binding of two to three Ca 2+ ions and in phospholipid binding. Interestingly, the CBRs also correspond topologically to the complementaritydetermining regions (CDRs) of the variable domains of antibodies. Structure-function studies of C2 domains from PKCα and cytosolic phospholipase A 2 (cPLA 2 ) have shown that the two bound Ca 2+ ions in each C2 domain play distinct roles: one provides a bridge between the C2 domain and anionic phospholipids, whereas the second Ca 2+ induces a conformational change that enhances membrane-protein interactions (Cho, 2001; Stahelin and Cho, 2001) . FYVE domains. FYVE fingers are modular domains of ∼60 residues that specifically bind to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate (PI3P). They are observed in numerous eukaryotic proteins from yeast to human, and function primarily in the regulation of endocytic membrane trafficking (for a review, see Stenmark et al., 2002) . The name originates from the first four FYVE finger-containing proteins identified: Fab1p, YOTB, Vac1p, and EEA1. The three-dimensional structure of the FYVE finger consists of two double-stranded antiparallel βsheets, a C-terminal helix and two long loops ( Fig. 17.1.10D ; Misra and Hurley, 1999; Mao et al., 2000) . The core structure is further stabilized by two Zn 2+ ions that are coordinated by four conserved Cys-X-X-Cys motifs. A 2.2-Å crystal structure of the homodimeric EEA1 FYVE finger bound to inositol 1,3-bisphosphate (a soluble analogue of PI3P) reveals the probable PI3P binding site, which includes residues from the following conserved FYVE signature motifs: the N-terminal Trp-X-X-Asp, the C-terminal RCV, and the Arg-(Arg/Lys)-His-His-Cys-Arg motif (Dumas et al., 2001) . A lower resolution NMR structure of EEA1 bound to di-C 4 -PI3P shows a similar binding site, but with different atomic contacts (Ku-tateladze and Overduin, 2001) . Furthermore, a hydrophobic N-terminal loop (referred to as the turret loop) adjacent to the PI3P binding site is proposed to partially penetrate and interact with the membrane surface. PDZ domains. PDZ domains are compact globular domains of ∼90 residues that serve as protein-protein interaction modules in the assembly of large complexes. For reviews, see Hung and Sheng (2002) and Ponting et al. (1997) . These relatively abundant domains are widely observed in bacteria, plants, and higher eukaryotes, including humans. Several of these domains (up to 13) are often found within one protein. Formerly known as Disc-large homology regions (DHRs) or GLGF repeats, PDZ modules derived their current nomenclature from the first three PDZ-containing proteins identified: PSD-95/SAP90, Disc-large, and ZO-1. The first PDZ structures determined were the third PDZ of rat PSD-95 (Doyle et al., 1996) and the third PDZ domain of human Dlg (Morais Cabral et al., 1996) . Structurally, the domain comprises a five-or six-stranded βsandwich and two α-helices that specifically bind the C-terminal peptide of certain proteins ( Fig. 17.1.11A ). The peptide ligand binds as an antiparallel β-strand between the β-strand and the αB-helix with up to nanomolar affinity. PDZ domains have also been reported to interact with internal peptide sequences in addition to C-terminal peptides, as observed in the crystal structure of nNOS and syntropin (Hillier et al., 1999) . Three classes of PDZ domains have been loosely defined based on their specificity for the last four residues of the bound peptide: class I binds the sequence -X-Ser/Thr-X-Φ, class II binds -X-Φ-X-Φ, and class III binds -X-Asp/Glu-X-Φ, where X represents any amino acid and Φ represents a hydrophobic residue. However, a more comprehensive and complicated classification has also been proposed based on the identity of two residues within the PDZ fold (Bezprozvanny and Maximov, 2001) . VHS domains. VHS domains comprise ∼140 residues and reside in the N-termini of certain proteins that play key roles in vesicular trafficking and protein sorting. The name VHS originates from Vps27, Hrs, and STAM, three proteins that harbor this domain; however, to date, well over 100 proteins are known to contain VHS domains. These can be divided into four categories based on their relative placement with other modular domains (Lohi et al., 2002) . Group 1 consists of the STAM/EAST/Hbp family, each of which have the VHS-SH3-ITAM domain organization (see above for SH3). Group 2 proteins have a VHS-FYVE arrangement which includes the Vps27 and Hrs proteins (see above for FYVE). Group 3 contain Golgi-localizing, γ-adaptin ear homology domain, ARF-interacting (GGA) proteins with a VHS-GAT-ear arrangement. Finally, group 4 are VHS-containing proteins that do not fit into groups 1 to 3. Crystal structures of the VHS domains of Drosophila Hrs and human TOM1 Misra et al., 2000) revealed a righthanded superhelix of eight α-helices ( Fig.  17 .1.11B) with striking structural homology to the eight-helix ENTH domain of epsin-1. The first seven helices of the VHS and ENTH domains superimpose with rms deviations of ∼1.8 Å (Lohi et al., 2002) . Furthermore, the VHS domain displays structural similarities to HEAT and ARM repeats. More recently, crystal structures of the VHS domains of GGA1 and GGA3 complexed with target peptides showed that signal peptides containing an acidic-cluster dileucine (ACLL) motif, Asn-X-X-Leu-Leu, bind to a groove between α-helices 6 and 8 (Fig. 17.1.11B; Misra et al., 2002; Shiba et al., 2002) . SNAREs. Soluble, n-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment-protein receptors (SNAREs) comprise a superfamily of conserved eukaryotic proteins that function in membrane fusion. They are characterized by ∼60 residue SNARE domains consisting of a long amphipathic α-helix. Most SNAREs are type II transmembrane proteins with an N-terminal cytoplasmic SNARE domain and a very short extracytoplasmic region; however, some are fastened to the membrane by palmitoylation or prenylation rather than by a transmembrane domain (Hay, 2001) . Upon complex formation, SNARE domains anchored to opposite membranes come together to form a helical bundle that promotes membrane fusion. For reviews, see Hay (2001) and Misura et al. (2000a) . First observed to atomic resolution in the crystal structure of the syntaxin-1A/synaptobrevin-II/SNAP-25B complex (Sutton et al., 1998) , this complex comprises a structurally conserved coiled-coil of four parallel α-helices ( Fig. 17.1.11C ). Superficially, it resembles the tetrameric GCN4 four-helix-bundle with a largely hydrophobic core; however, deviations in the heptad repeat pattern and composition, as well as local deviations in helical curvature, set this complex apart from known leucine-zipper or coiled-coil proteins. SNARE complexes consist of a single SNARE from one membrane termed an R-SNARE and three Q-SNARES associated with the opposing membrane. In some cases, two Q-SNARES are on the same polypeptide (e.g., while in other cases all three Q-SNARES are on separate molecules. The "R" and "Q" designations are based on the presence of conserved Arg or Gln residues in the center (or 0 layer) of each respective SNARE domain. The Arg and three Gln residues interact with each other at the core of the complex to form an intriguing hydrogen bond network completely isolated from solvent. The Q-SNAREs have been further classified by protein profiling (Bock et al., 2001) . Group Qa are homologous to syntaxins, group Qb are homologous to the N-terminal helix of SNAP-25 and the group Qc SNAREs are homologous to the C-terminal helix of SNAP-25. Furthermore, the R-, Qa-, Qb-, and Qc-SNAREs each appear to occupy conserved positions within the complex. In isolation, SNARE domains are unstructured and are referred to as existing in an open conformation that favors SNARE complex formation; however, syntaxin SNAREs have an Habc domain N-terminal to the SNARE domain that has an antiparallel triple-helix structure (Fernandez et al., 1998) . The Habc domain can complex with the SNARE domain (referred to as H3 in this context), induce helical structure, and form a four-helix bundle (Munson et al., 2000) . This is referred to as a closed SNARE conformation and inhibits complex formation with other SNAREs. Syntaxin appears to exist in equilibrium between open and closed forms. Regulatory proteins such as nSec1 can perturb this equilibrium by binding to the closed conformation, thereby stabilizing it and preventing SNARE complex formation. The crystal structure of yeast syntaxin Sso1p (H3Habc; Munson et al., 2000) shows the H3 helix is very similar in structure to the comparative helix in a SNARE complex, although its orientations with neighboring helices is strikingly different. Curiously, the crystal structure of the nSec1/syntaxin 1a complex (Misura et al., 2000b ) reveals the H3 domain adopting an irregular bent helical structure distinct from that of the SNARE complex. Thus, the H3 region of syntaxin can have at least three different conformations depending on its local environment or binding partners. SAM domains. The sterile alpha motif (SAM) is a modular protein interaction domain present in a wide variety of signaling proteins, including receptor tyrosine kinases, Ser/Thr kinases, diacylglycerol kinases, transcription factors, scaffolding and adaptor proteins, polyhomeotic proteins, and GTPases. The SMART database (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/ browse.shtml) lists over 700 proteins containing SAM domains. SAM domains are ∼70 residues in size and generally reside in the Nor C-terminal ends of proteins. The basic fold consists of an N-terminal extended region followed by four short α-helices and one long C-terminal α-helix ( Fig. 17.1.11D ). Several modes of SAM domain interaction have been observed crystallographically, including dimer formation as well as polymerization (Smalla et al., 1999; Stapleton et al., 1999; Thanos et al., 1999; Kim et al., 2002) . Furthermore, there are reports of SAM domains binding other non-SAM containing proteins. MH2 domains (C-terminal domain of Smad proteins). Smad proteins are an integral part of the receptor signal transduction apparatus for the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) family of cytokines such as TGF-β, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and activins. Smads are divided into three classes: comediator Smads (Co-Smads), receptor regulated Smads (R-Smads), and inhibitory Smads (I-Smads). Both the N-and C-terminal domains of Smads are conserved across species and connected by a variable linker region (L-domain). The N-terminal domain (MH1) interacts with DNA, whereas the C-terminal MH2 domain is involved in phosphorylation-regulated homoand hetero-oligomerization among Smads as well as interaction with other proteins in the signaling pathway. The fold of the MH2 domain comprises a twisted antiparallel β sandwich made from five-and six-stranded β-sheets capped at one end by a three-helix bundle pointing away from the sandwich, and capped at the other end by a three large loops and a helix (Fig. 17.1.11E; Shi et al., 1997) . Signal-dependent phosphorylation of two serines at the C-terminal Ser-Ser-X-Ser sequence of R-Smads is believed to trigger the formation of a heterotrimer with a Co-Smad. Homotrimeric crystal structures of R-Smads 1, 2, and 4 MH2 domains (psuedophosphorylated, phosphorylated, and unphosphorylated, respectively) have provided models for this interaction and indicate a phosphoserine binding site at the L3 loop. (Fig. 17.1.11F; Shi et al., 1997; Qin et al., 2001; Wu et al., 2001) . There are also crystal structures of complexes of the MH2 domains of both Smad2 and Smad3 with extended structures of SARA (Smad anchor for receptor activation; Fig 17. 1.11G; Wu et al., 2000; Qin et al., 2002) . In addition to the numerous modular domains that form independently folded functional units, a number of much smaller structural motifs of 20 to 40 residues are observed that exist as tandem arrays of 5 to 25 repeats (Groves and Barford, 1999) . In proteins containing these arrays, the functional unit is a set of repeats rather than the individual motifs. The stacking of adjacent motifs often results in curving superhelical structures, many of which function in the context of macromolecular binding interactions. Four of the more well known of these structural repeat motifs are discussed below. Leucine-rich repeats. The leucine-rich repeat (LRR) was first identified in 1985 in the sequence of α2-glycoprotein (Takahashi et al., 1985) . Now, however, over 2900 proteins are reported to contain LRRs according to the SMART database (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/browse.shtml). Most of these are eukaryotic proteins, but >100 are in prokaryotic sequences. Although these proteins have diverse functions, a common element that most LRRs share is mediating protein-protein interaction. LRRs comprise repeats of 20 to 30 amino acids with the following eleven-residue repeat consensus sequence Leu-X-X-Leu-X-Leu-X-X-(Asn/Cys)-X-Leu, where X represents any residue and some L positions can be occupied by Val, Ile, or Phe (Kajava, 1998; Kobe and Kajava, 2001) . The three-dimensional structure of the repeat consists of an α-helix followed by a single β-strand (Kobe and Deisenhofer, 1993) . Subsequent repeats stack directly on top of each other such that the β-strands form a curved parallel β-sheet and the helices line up parallel to a common axis ( Fig. 17.1.12A ). LRR structures are generally crescent shaped with the β-sheet along the inner concave surface and the helices on the outside convex surface with very little twist along the central axis. So far, the β-sheet region and adjacent loops of LRRs appear to be the most frequent areas for protein-protein interaction (Kobe and Kajava, 2001) . HEAT repeats. The HEAT repeat derives its name from four of the first proteins identified to contain it: Huntingtin, elongation factor 3, the PR65/A subunit of protein phosphatase 2A, and lipid kinase TOR (Andrade and Bork, 1995) . Andrade and coworkers (2001) reported the detection of 71 HEAT repeat-containing eukaryotic proteins in the Swissprot database. HEAT repeats are 37 to 43 residues long and consist of two antiparallel α-helices designated A and B. Between 3 and 22 repeats stack directly on top of each other and thus form two layers of parallel helices with an overall superhelical curvature (Fig. 17. 1.12B; Groves et al., 1999) . B helices line the concave surface and A helices the convex surface. The crystal structures of importin β1 and β2 bound with different protein ligands each reveal protein recognition sites among the inner B helices (Chook and Blobel, 1999; Cingolani et al., 1999; Vetter et al., 1999) . For recent reviews about HEAT repeats, see Andrade et al. (2001) , Groves and Barford, (1999), and Kobe et al. (1999) . ARM repeats. ARM repeats are named after the armadillo protein, the Drosophila segment polarity gene product in which they were first identified. These repeats are very similar to HEAT repeats and are ∼40 residues in length; however, instead of the two helices observed in each HEAT repeat, ARM repeats consist of three helices, designated H1, H2, and H3 (Groves and Barford, 1999; Andrade et al., 2001) . The SMART database reports nearly 400 proteins containing ARM repeats (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/browse.shtml). The crystal structures of β-catenin and karyopherin α (importin α) revealed stacking of repeats to form three ladders of parallel helices arranged in a superhelical structure (Fig. 17.1.12C; Conti et al., 1998; . The superhelical twist is formed by an ∼30° rotation of each repeat from its neighbors. Within individual repeats, the antiparallel helices H2 and H3 have orientations similar to helices A and B of HEAT repeats. Helix H1, however, is smaller and lies perpendicular to the H2/H3 pair. H3 and its flanking loops are observed to form a groove lined with conserved residues along the entire length of the ARM repeat structure. The structure of β-catenin complexed with the cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin provides a striking example of how this groove can be used for protein recognition (Huber and Weis, 2001) . In the complex, the C-terminal 100 residues of cadherin bind in a predominantly extended conformation along the entire length of the H3 groove of β-catenin. A variant of the ARM motif is also observed to bind to specific RNA sequences in the Pumilio family of mRNA translation regulators . Ankyrin repeats. The ∼33-residue ankyrin (ANK) repeat is found in numerous proteins with varied functions, such as cyclin-dependent protein kinase inhibitors, the notch membrane receptor, the inhibitory subunit (IκBα) of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), the transcriptional regulator GABPβ, the p53-binding protein 53BP2, certain cytoskeletal organizing proteins, and toxins (Groves and Barford, 1999; Sedgwick and Smerdon, 1999) . The SMART database reports over 2700 proteins containing ankyrin repeats (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg. de/browse.shtml). The ankyrin repeat receives its name from the cytoskeletal protein ankyrin in which 24 repeats were found (Lux et al., 1990) ; however, it was first identified three years earlier in several cell cycle and developmental regulators (Breeden and Nasmyth, 1987) . Amidst the diverse assortment of proteins containing ankyrin repeats, the common functional theme that has developed is that of protein-protein interaction. The ankyrin fold was first observed in the crystal structure of 53BP2 bound to the p53 tumor suppressor (Gorina and Pavletich, 1996) . The structural repeating unit consists of a βhairpin loop followed by a pair of antiparallel α-helices that are roughly perpendicular to the β-hairpin ( Fig. 17.1.12D ). However, the repeating amino acid sequence actually begins with the second β-strand in one unit and ends with the first β-strand in the next. Stacking of repeats results in a curving structure with a left-handed twist, consisting of two rows of parallel helices and a narrow extended β-sheet. Ankyrin repeat proteins recognize their target proteins in varied ways, but a strikingly common theme involves interaction through the ends of the βhairpin fingers. Eukaryotic protein kinases (PK) comprise an enormous superfamily of homologous proteins that catalyze the transfer of the γ phosphate of ATP to specific hydroxyamino acids on a protein substrate. These proteins play numerous roles directly regulating and participating in a diverse array of signal transduction cascades. PKs can be broadly categorized as tyrosine kinases and serine/threonine kinases; however, a comprehensive classification system was published in 1995 based primarily on sequence homology (Hanks and Hunter, 1995) . This classification has recently been expanded to include a total of seven major groups of PK families (Manning et al., 2002a (Manning et al., , 2002b . Tyrosine kinases (TK) comprise one group and include both membrane-spanning receptors, such as the insulin receptor, and cytosolic proteins, such as Src kinases. The Ser/Thr kinases comprise six main groups. The AGC group includes cyclic nucleotide-regulated PKs and diacylglyceride-regulated/phospholipid-depe ndent PKs (PKC), among others. The CaMK group consists of calcium/calmodulin-dependent PKs. The CMGC group includes cyclin-dependent PKs, mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinases, glycogen synthase kinase-3, and casein kinase-II. The STE grouping includes several MAPK cascade families. The CK1 group comprises CK1, tau tubulin kinase (TTBK), and vaccinia related kinase (VRK) families. The sixth group of serine/threonine kinases comprises tyrosine kinase-like (TKL) families. These include the mixed lineage kinase (MLK), interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase (IRAK), LIMK/TESK, Raf, receptor interacting protein kinase (RIPK), and the activin and TGF-β receptor kinases. At least 50 proteins have been identified that have sequence similarity with eukaryotic protein kinases and yet are either reported or predicted to lack catalytic activity (Manning et al., 2002b) . Finally, more than a dozen atypical protein kinases (aPKs) have been identified that are reported to have protein kinase activity, but have no sequence homology with the eukaryotic protein kinase superfamily (Manning et al., 2002b) . Protein kinase catalytic domain. Despite the diversity of this superfamily, structural studies have consistently revealed a structurally conserved core fold for the catalytic domain of eukaryotic protein kinases. Other modular domains (e.g., SH2, SH3, PH, SAM, C2, and PDZ domains, to name a few) are sometimes fused to the catalytic domain for regulatory or localizing purposes. First elucidated in the crystal structure of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (also known as PKA; Knighton et al., 1991) , the bilobal protein kinase fold consists of an N-terminal lobe (N-lobe) comprising a five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet with a flanking α-helix and a larger C-terminal, primarily α-helical lobe (C-lobe) of eight to ten α helices and some short β-strands ( Fig. 17.1.13A ). The active site is located between the lobes with the N-lobe contributing an ATP-binding glycinerich loop and the C-lobe providing most of the protein-substrate-binding site. An activation loop in the C-lobe contains one or more phosphorylation sites that help activate the enzyme when phosphorylated. Although the topology and core catalytic domain structures are well conserved across this large superfamily, there are some noticeable differences among various members. These include additions and deletions of secondary structure elements, changes in the orientation of secondary structure elements, N-and C-terminal extensions, and variations in the relative orientation between the Nand C-lobes. Some of these structural differences appear to correspond to the sequencebased classifications of PKs discussed above. Noteworthy variations include a 25-to 30-residue insertion between helices G and H (PKA nomenclature) in the CMGC protein kinases (e.g., cyclin-dependent and MAP kinases) and the extra helix C observed in the cAMP-dependent protein kinases. Two atypical protein kinases, the transient receptor potential (TRP) Ca 2+ -channel kinase (also referred to as ChaK or TRP-PLIK) domain (Yamaguchi et al., 2001) and the actin-fragmin kinase (Steinbacher et al., 1999) have been found to share significant structural homology with the eukaryotic PK superfamily members despite a lack of sequence similarity; however, the structurally homologous region in these enzymes is smaller, comprising most of the N-lobe but only the N-terminal portion-i.e., helices D and E (PKA nomenclature) and the following β-strands-of the C-lobe. The rest of the C-lobe consists largely of α-helices that do not correspond to those in the PK superfamily. Furthermore, actin-fragmin kinase has an extra two-helix insertion in the N-lobe, and the C-lobe of ChaK has a bound zinc atom that is sequestered from solvent. Src family kinases. The structure of src tyrosine kinases is briefly discussed here as a special case to illustrate how SH2 and SH3 domains are used in cis to regulate and localize protein kinase activity. Most src family tyrosine kinases share a common architecture comprising four Src homology (SH) regions in addition to a variable region. The N-terminal SH4 region contains a myristylation signal required for attachment to the membrane, followed by a variable region that may localize the enzyme more specifically. The subsequent SH3 and SH2 domains bind proline-rich targets and certain phosphotyrosine motifs respectively (for more information, see SH2 Domains and SH3 Domains, respectively). These two domains are involved in both regulation of the enzymatic activity and subcellular localization of the kinase. The catalytic activity of the kinase is found in the C-terminal SH1 region. A short Supplement 35 Current Protocols in Protein Science Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds segment C-terminal to the SH1 domain contains a tyrosine residue that inactivates the kinase when phosphorylated. Similar to other protein kinases, phosphorylation of a tyrosine in the activation loop increases activity of the kinase. The crystal structure of inactive haematopoietic cell kinase (Hck; Sicheri et al., 1997) includes the SH2, SH3, and catalytic domain of the enzyme, while the structures of the catalytic domains alone have been determined for lymphoid cell kinase (Lck) in its activated form (Yamaguchi and Hendrickson, 1996) and C-terminal Src kinase (Csk) in its inactive form (Lamers et al., 1999) . The Hck crystal structure shows the SH2 domain interacting with a C-terminal phosphotyrosine and the SH3 domain bound to the linker region between the SH2 and kinase domains, effectively locking the kinase in an inactive state ( Fig. 17 .1.13B). Despite the fact that both the SH3 and SH2 domains are located distal to the active site of the kinase, their intramolecular interactions in the inactive form results in positioning helix C of the N-lobe such that the orientation of a key residue in the active site is disrupted. Eukaryotic protein phosphatases comprise three major families of enzymes, each of which have conserved core folds (Barford et al., 1998) . The protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) family dephosphorylates phosphotyrosine residues, while the phosphoprotein phosphatase (PPP) and protein phosphatase M/Mg 2+ -dependent phosphatase (PPM) families consist of enzymes that dephosphorylate phosphorylated serine and threonine residues. PTPs. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) include cytosolic and membrane-spanning, receptor-like, tyrosine-specific phosphatases in addition to dual-specificity phosphatases (DSPs) that can dephosphorylate phosphorylated tyrosine, serine, or threonine. Receptorlike PTPs generally have two tandem PTP domains whereas other PTPs contain one PTP domain. Structurally, there are three subtypes of PTP catalytic domains, all of which share a threelayer α/β/α sandwich architecture. The lowmolecular-weight (subtype I) PTPs are composed of a single domain containing a central four-stranded parallel β-sheet flanked by six helices on both sides ( Fig. 17.1.13C ). The βsheet has a strand order of 2-1-3-4. Subtype II PTPs have a central highly curved five-or ten-stranded mixed β-sheet sandwiched between four to seven helices on one side and one or two on the other ( Fig. 17.1.13D ). Unlike subtype I, the strand order for the central parallel strands of this β-sheet is 1-4-2-3. Subtype II PTPs include the so-called high-molecularweight PTPs such as PTB1, Yersinia PTP, and SHP-1 and -2, in addition to the smaller DSPs such as VHR, MAP kinase phosphatase, kinase-associated phosphatase (KAP), and tumor suppressor PTEN (Table 17 .1.5). The high-molecular-weight PTPs have a nine-stranded βsheet whereas the DSPs have a smaller fivestranded β-sheet composed of the same four central parallel strands and one preceding antiparallel strand, and have an additional one or two extra helices. Although superficially quite similar to other DSP structures, the catalytic domain of CDC25 has a rather different topology and the strand order of its five-stranded parallel β-sheet is 1-5-4-2-3 ( Fig. 17 .1.13E). Therefore, it may be referred to as a third subtype of protein phosphatase. Interestingly, CDC25 has the same fold as the sulfurtransferases rhodanase, GlpE, and the ERK2-binding domain of MAPK phosphatase-3. Although the topologies of these protein phosphatase subtypes are different, the active site strandloop-helix regions show a striking structural similarity, and they all feature an essential nucleophilic cysteine residue located in a cleft between the β-sheet and the larger helical bundle. Protein serine/threonine phosphatases. The PPP and PPM families both comprise metaldependent serine/threonine protein phosphatases. The fold of the PPP family catalytic domain is a mixed β sandwich flanked by seven α helices on one side, an α/β structure of two to three α helices, and a couple of β-strands on the other side ( Fig. 17.1.13F ). The active site, including the essential Zn 2+ and Fe 3+ cations, is located among the loops at one end of the β sandwich. Enzymes in this family include PP1, calcineurin (PP2B), and the bacteriophage λ protein phosphatase. This fold is also shared by at least three other phosphoryltransfer metalloenzymes that are not protein phosphatases: purple acid phosphatase, the N-terminal domain of UDP-sugar hydrolase, and the N-terminal domain of the DNA double-strand-break repair enzyme MRE11 nuclease (Table 17 .1.5). The PPM family includes both eukaryotic and prokaryotic protein phosphatases and has been defined by protein phosphatase 2C (PP2C). Although PP2C has no sequence ho-mology with PPP phosphatases, it is also a metalloenzyme with a binuclear metal (in this case Mn 2+ ) center at the active site and has a fold that resembles that of PPP phosphatases. The N-terminal domain consists of an elevenstranded antiparallel β sandwich surrounded by α helices. As in the PPP family, the active site is located at one end of the β sandwich. The C-terminal domain consists of three antiparallel helices. Alkaline phosphatases (AP) are dimeric enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of phosphomonoesters and are common to all organisms. The overall structure of an AP monomer comprises two domains, both of which are α/β/α sandwiches ( Fig. 17.1.14A ). The smaller domain consists of a three-or four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet sandwiched between two αhelices, one on each side. The larger domain has a central ten-stranded β-sheet in the middle flanked by thirteen helices of various lengths. Except for the eighth strand, this β-sheet is composed of parallel strands. Two other enzymes that share the core AP fold include arylsulfatase and prokaryotic cofactor-independent phosphoglycerate mutase (Table 17 .1.5). The sugar phosphatase fold is shared among the families of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, inositol monophosphatase, and inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase. The molecule folds into a five-layered α/β/α/β/α sandwich ( Table 17 .1.5). The two β-sheets are five and eight-stranded, respectively, and mostly antiparallel. The location of the AMP binding site is at the end of the N-terminal α-helix. This fold also remotely resembles the actin fold. The eukaryotic cell cycle is regulated by a series of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) that are activated by association with cyclins. Several different forms of cyclins (i.e., cyclins A, B, C, D, E, and H) are known to regulate separate CDKs. Conserved among these cyclins is a region of ∼100 amino acids, termed the cyclin box. The basic cyclin box fold contains five α-helices with the central helix, α3, being surrounded by the remaining four (Jeffrey et al., 1995; Noble et al., 1997) . Cyclin A consists of two cyclin box domains in tandem ( Fig. 17 .1.14C and Table 17.1.5). The cyclin box fold is also observed in transcription factor IIB and retinoblastoma tumor suppressor domains. Based on the structure of a cyclinA-CDK2 complex (De Bondt et al., 1993) , the activation of CDK has been postulated to occur through a cyclin-induced conformational change in the PSTAIRE helix (C helix) and the T-loop of the kinase domain. Numerous DNA-binding domains are observed to utilize a small number of conserved substructures or structural motifs for binding DNA. In most cases a portion of the structural motif protrudes from the domain and interacts with the major and/or minor groove of DNA and also with the phosphate backbone through hydrogen bonds, salt bridges, and nonpolar van der Waals interactions. By far the most prevalent interactions involve an α-helix binding in the major groove. Other less common interactions include β-strands or loops binding in either the major or minor groove of the DNA. In a few cases, considerable distortion of Bform DNA is induced upon binding. This section summarizes some commonly observed DNA-binding structural motifs and DNA-binding domains. The helix-turn-helix (HTH) structural motif, first observed in the crystal structure of the λ Cro protein (Anderson et al., 1981) , is one of the most common and well characterized DNAbinding motifs, and is found in a very diverse group of proteins (Table 17 .1.6). The HTH motif is part of a three-helix bundle in which the second and third helices (α2 and α3) of the bundle make direct contacts with DNA. The third helix, the recognition helix, protrudes from the rest of the protein into the major groove of DNA, making the majority (but not all) of the base-specific contacts, while the second helix sits above the recognition helix at an ∼120° angle to it, forming a bridge across the two phosphate backbones on either side of the major groove ( Fig. 17.1.15 ). The N-terminal helix (α1) lies across the second helix opposite the DNA, completing the helical bundle where it forms interactions with the rest of the protein and may or may not interact with the DNA. There are now tens of permutations of the DNA-binding HTH motif listed as various superfamilies in the online SCOP database (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics). For the purposes of this overview, four of these permu-tations are discussed here: prokaryotic or phage repressor, eukaryotic homeodomain, winged helix, and PurR repressor, with some structures falling into more than one category (Table  17. 1.6; Fig. 17.1.15) . Prokaryotic repressor. The structures of prokaryotic repressor HTHs have served as the prototypical model for the overall HTH motif. In this particular class, the HTH motif by itself is not stable enough to fold or bind DNA, but requires the scaffolding of the rest of the protein. Furthermore, monomers often lack DNAbinding ability and thus dimerization is required for binding to DNA. Interestingly, outside the HTH motif of prokaryotic repressors there is little structural consensus among these DNA-binding proteins. Their structures have been observed to vary from α/β folds to all helical folds. Eukaryotic homeodomain. The eukaryotic homeodomain HTHs all use an N-terminal arm from helix 1 to bind DNA in the adjacent minor groove . Some also use a C-terminal arm for minor groove binding as well. The additional interactions of the arm(s) enable homeodomains to bind DNA as monomers, although most homeodomains are observed to function as homo-or heterodimers in vivo. Also, some proteins in this class (e.g., yeast RAP1 telomere-binding protein, proto-oncogene product Myb, the Paired class homeodomains, the Oct-1 POU domain) contain two HTH motifs connected in tandem by a polypeptide linker. Winged-helix motif. Another class of HTH proteins is referred to as the winged-helix motif ( Fig. 17.1.15D) . First characterized as a motif in the eukaryotic HNF-3/fork head transcription factor (Clark et al., 1993) , this motif uses one or two flexible loops (or wings) that protrude from the HTH on either side at approximately right angles to the recognition helix to provide additional DNA contacts. The more prominent wing is usually part of a small twoor three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet, a distinctive feature of the winged-helix motif. For a detailed review of the winged helix motif see Gajiwala and Burley (2000) . PurR repressor. The PurR repressor of the LacI family represents a more extreme variant of the HTH motif with three major differences from the canonical HTH (Schumacher et al., 1994) . First, although the spatial orientation is consistent with the HTH, the connectivity of the three helices is completely different so that helices 1 and 2 interact with the DNA instead of helices 2 and 3 ( Fig. 17.1.15E) . Second, the orientation of the HTH with respect to the DNA dyad is in the reverse direction from what is observed in the classical HTH. Third, in addition to the HTH motif a fourth helix (the hinge helix) is present to bind the DNA in the adjacent minor groove. In a physiological dimer, the two symmetry-related hinge helices interact with each other in an antiparallel manner to pry open the minor groove with a set of leucine levers which forces the DNA axis to bend 45°. Six of the many classes of DNA-binding proteins that use zinc coordination to form the stable core or folding template for DNA-binding will be discussed in this section. These include the TFIIIA type zinc finger, the GATA-1 Cys 4 type zinc finger, the Zn 2 Cys 6 binuclear cluster, the nuclear hormone receptor DNAbinding domains, the transcription elongation factor TFIIS, and the zinc binding loop of the p53 tumor suppressor. The Cys 2 His 2 zinc finger structural motif is the most common DNA-binding motif among eukaryotic transcription factors, with several thousand protein sequences identified (Berg and Shi, 1996) . A canonical zinc finger motif contains the consensus sequence (Tyr/Phe)-X-Cys-X 2-4 -Cys-X 3 -Phe-X 5 -Leu-X 2 -His-X 3-5 -His where X represents any amino acid, and the Cys and His residues serve as zinc ligands (Berg and Shi, 1996) . The structure of the motif is comprised of two short antiparallel β-strands followed by an α-helix, which are stabilized by a small hydrophobic core and a tetrahedrally coordinated zinc atom ( Fig. 17.1.16A ). The N-terminal end of the α-helix rests in the major groove where it makes base-specific contacts while the β-sheet lies on the other side of the helix opposite the DNA (Fig. 17.1.17A ) to form limited contact with the phosphate backbone. Zinc finger-containing proteins generally use this motif in tandem arrays within the DNAbinding domain. Since the first three-dimensional structure determination of a zinc finger-DNA complex (Zif268 from mouse intermediate protein; Pavletich and Pabo, 1991) , the structures of several other protein-DNA complexes have been elucidated, including the DNA-binding domains from human oncogene GLI, the Drosophila regulator protein tramtrack, and TFIIIa, as well as numerous structures of uncomplexed zinc fingers (Fairall et al., 1993; Pavletich and Pabo, 1993; Foster et al., 1997) . First observed in the eukaryotic transcription elongation factor TFIIS (Qian et al., 1993) , the zinc ribbon motif consists of a small threeor sometimes four-or five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet that coordinates a zinc atom within the loop region at one end of the sheet (Fig  17. 1.16B; Pan and Wigley, 2000) . The zinc is coordinated by three Cys and one His residue (or four Cys side chains in the case of TFIIS). The mechanism of DNA binding for this motif is controversial and awaits further clarification from future structure determinations of zinc ribbon-DNA complexes. A DNA-binding structural motif containing a Zn 2 Cys 6 binuclear cluster has been characterized in numerous fragments of fungal transcription factors. The three-dimensional structure of fragments of these proteins-e.g., GAL4 and pyrimidine pathway regulator 1 (PPR1)-complexed with DNA have been determined (Marmorstein et al., 1992; Marmorstein and Harrison, 1994) , revealing homodimers each containing three regions: two N-terminal zinc-coordinated DNA-binding modules (one in each monomer), a linker region, and a short coiled-coil made from two C-terminal helices which protrude away from the DNA. The DNA-binding modules are nearly identical in both proteins, consisting of two short helices, each followed by an extended loop ( Fig.  17.1.16C ). Six cysteines from each module tetrahedrally coordinate two zinc atoms. An internal two-fold symmetry relates the two helix-loop zinc-coordinated motifs within each module. In both GAL4 and PPR1, the C-terminal end of the first helix from each module points into the major groove, mediating basespecific DNA contacts to a CGG triplet (Fig. 17.1.17C and D, respectively) . Apart from the DNA-binding motifs, the structures of GAL4 and PPR1 are rather different from each other. The linker region in each monomer of GAL4 is completely extended, making practically no contacts with the rest of the protein, whereas this same region in PPR1 folds into a more compact antiparallel β-ribbon. The GAL4 homodimer is highly symmetric, with the coiledcoil dimerization region projecting perpendicularly from the DNA. The PPR1 homodimer, however, becomes very asymmetric beyond the N-terminal DNA-binding modules, leaning to one side to form a hydrophobic core. Several other complexes of Zn 2 Cys 6 motif-containing proteins with DNA show similar per-turbations of domain orientation while retaining the basic fold (Table 17 .1.6). The NMR solution structure of the chicken erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 complexed with its target DNA reveals a DNAbinding structural motif distinctly different from the canonical zinc finger structure (Omichinski et al., 1993) . The consensus sequence Cys-X 2 -Cys-X 17 -Cys-X 2 -Cys characterizes an entire family of regulatory proteins expressed in numerous cell types, each of which recognize a GATA DNA sequence. The DNA-binding domain of GATA-1 consists of two short two-stranded irregular antiparallel β-sheets followed by an α-helix and a long C-terminal loop (Fig. 17.1.16D ). The tetrahedrally coordinated zinc is ligated by cysteines from the first β-sheet and helix. The α-helix and loop which connects the two β-sheets are both located in the DNA major groove, and the long C-terminal tail crosses the phosphate backbone to sit in the minor groove ( Fig.  17.1.17B ). Eukaryotic nuclear hormone receptors form a superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors that regulate numerous cellular processes. These proteins generally consist of an N-terminal DNA-binding domain and a C-terminal hormone-binding domain responsible for transactivation. The minimal core of the N-terminal DNA-binding domain (60 to 70 residues) consists of two helices separated by a long loop packed against each other at approximately right angles ( Fig. 17.1.16E ). Two zinc atoms, one at the N-terminus of each helix, are each coordinated by four cysteine side chains. The first helix, also termed the recognition helix, lies in the major groove of bound DNA, making sequence-specific contacts while other portions of the core domain make extensive contacts with the phosphate backbone on either side of the major groove ( Fig.  17.1.17E ). Nuclear receptors are observed to bind cooperatively to both direct and inverted DNA repeats as either homo-or heterodimers. The three-dimensional structures of the DNAbinding domains of several nuclear receptors complexed with DNA have been elucidated (Table 17 .1.6). These include the glucocorticoid receptor (Luisi et al., 1991) , estrogen receptor (Schwabe et al., 1993) , 9-cis retinoic (Rastinejad et al., 1995) . The MADS box (also known as the SRFlike) family of proteins comprises many eukaryotic regulatory proteins, including human serum response factor (SRF), Drosophila trachea development factor (DSRF), the METF2 myocyte-specific enhancer factors, and the MCM1 gene regulator from yeast, all of which contain a highly conserved 60-residue core consensus sequence (Table 17 .1.6; Pellegrini et al., 1995) . SRF was the first of these proteins to have its three-dimensional structure determined (Pellegrini et al., 1995) . This protein is homodimeric and consists of three layers ( Fig.  17.1.18A ). The first layer is a left-handed antiparallel coiled-coil formed from an amphipathic helix from each monomer. The coiled-coil sits above the minor groove near the DNA dyad (the binding site) in an approximate parallel orientation to the minor groove and makes contacts with the phosphate backbone. The DNA is bent by 72° along its helical axis at this point, wrapping around the coiled-coil and enabling the N-terminal portions of the two helices to fit into the major groove of the DNA. In addition, N-terminal arms from each helix extend across the phosphate backbone and bind in the minor groove of the DNA. The coiled-coil is supported by a four-stranded antiparallel βsheet that lies flat across the helices opposite the DNA. The third layer consists of a small two-helix subdomain above the sheet. Similar to other dimeric DNA-binding proteins, the two-fold symmetry axis of the dimer often coincides with the dyad axis of the DNA binding site. The crystal structure of the MCM1 MADS-box protein bound to DNA and the MATα2 homeodomain core (Tan and Richmond, 1998 ) reveals an intriguing ternary complex in which a β-hairpin from MATα2 extends the MCM1 β-sheet, and both the MATα2 HTH motif and the MCM1 MADS-box dimer bind DNA. The fold of basic region leucine-zipper (bZIP) domains in eukaryotic transcription factors is relatively simple. First observed in the structure of the GCN4 homodimer (Ellenberger et al., 1992) and the c-Fos/c-Jun heterodimer (Glover and Harrison, 1995) , it consists of two, long parallel α-helices that dimerize via a coiled-coil leucine zipper motif at their C-terminal ends and spread apart like partially opened scissors at the N-terminal end, gripping the DNA between them (Fig. 17.1.18B ; Table  17 .1.6). The primary sequence of leucine zippers contains heptad repeats (a-b-c-d-e-f-g) with hydrophobic residues at position a, leucine at position d, and charged or hydrophilic residues at the other positions (Ellenberger, 1994) . Residues at positions a and d from each helix form extensive hydrophobic interactions at the core of the dimer interface, while charged side chains at positions e and g form inter-and intrahelical salt bridges at the edge of the interface. The N-terminal primarily basic ends of the helices lie in the major groove on either side of the DNA contacting base-pair edges and the phosphate backbone. The helix-loop-helix (HLH) structural motif is similar to the bZIP domain in both its DNAbinding and dimerization strategies. As with bZIP proteins, this structural motif binds DNA as a homo-or heterodimer. Each monomer consists of two long α-helices connected by a loop of variable length (5 to 23 residues) and composition forming a left-handed, parallel, four-helix bundle in the dimer (Fig. 17.1.18C ). The first helix in each monomer binds DNA with its N-terminal basic region sitting in the major groove on opposite sides of the DNA helix. Dimer contacts are made through the C-terminal portion of the first helix and a coiled-coil formed by the second helix of each monomer. In some members of the HLH family, the coiled-coil contacts are formed by a leucine zipper; in other HLH proteins the second helix is shorter and the coiled-coil is stabilized primarily through less regular hydrophobic contacts. In both cases, the dimer is required for DNA binding. DNA bound to this motif is primarily B-form with very little distortion observed. Examples of three-dimensional structures of HLH proteins include the eukaryotic transcription factor Max (Ferre-D' Amare et al., 1993) , the MyoD transcription activator , the HLH region of the upstream stimulatory factor (USF; Ferre-D' Amare et al., 1994) , and the E47 regulatory protein (Ellenberger et al., 1994;   DNA-binding proteins containing the highmobility-group (HMG) box comprise a diverse superfamily of eukaryotic regulatory proteins including various transcription factors (e.g., LEF-1), components of chromatin, products of fungal mating type genes, and the mammalian sex-determining gene product SRY (Table  17. 1.6; for reviews see Laudet et al., 1993; Travers, 2000) . The HMG consensus box consists of ∼80 residues with an average conservation of 25% amino acid identity between boxes. HMG box proteins fall into two subfamilies. The first is observed in all cell types, contains multiple HMG box domains, and tends to bind DNA with little specificity, while the second subfamily is found in fewer cell types, contains only one HMG box domain, and binds DNA specifically. In the mid-1990s, the NMR solution structures of the HMG domains in two proteins of the second subfamily complexed with DNA (Love et al., 1995; Werner et al., 1995) and the solution structures of uncomplexed HMG domains from the first subfamily revealed a three-helix L-shaped structure which binds DNA exclusively in the minor groove and induces profound structural changes in bound DNA ( Fig. 17.1.18D ). Helices 1 and 2 are antiparallel to each other (with an acute angle between them) forming the base of the L. Helix 3, the longest helix, is almost perpendicular to helix 2 and forms the vertical arm of the L. All three helices participate in forming a concave surface for binding the minor groove and phosphate backbone of the target DNA, causing severe DNA unwinding and bending away from the major groove. A unique fold shared by the H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 subunits of the octameric histone core of the nucleosome was first described by Arents et al. (1991) as the histone fold. Since then, the histone fold has been observed in the archeael histones, the TBP-associated factor (TAF) family of transcription factors (e.g., TAF II 42, TAF II 62, TAF II 18, TAF II 28; Xie et al., 1996; Birck et al., 1998) , and the TBP-associated negative cofactors (Kamada et al., 2001) . The individual polypeptides display a helix-loophelix structure, with a central long α-helix flanked on each side by a short α-helix ( Fig.  17.1.18E ). The histone core subunits and the TAF fragments form similar heterodimeric and heterotetrameric structures. The function of histones in eukaryotic cells is to provide a scaffold for nuclear DNA to wrap around into a highly compacted nucleosome. It has been postulated in TAFs that a similar TAF octameric organization is involved in transcription activation. The vast majority of DNA-binding proteins structurally characterized to date are observed to interact with DNA through helical structures. However, three different families of DNAbinding proteins have been characterized in which β-sheet structures are used as the primary contacts for protein-DNA interactions. The ribbon-helix-helix motif is found in prokaryotic and phage repressor proteins such as Arc (Raumann et al., 1994) , MetJ (Somers and Phillips, 1992) and Mnt (Burgering et al., 1994 ; Table 17 .1.6). These proteins bind DNA as dimers of dimers (homotetramers) and all have homologous structures in which the homodimer consists of a small helical bundle with a symmetric double-stranded antiparallel βsheet (β-ribbon) on the surface that can fit specifically into the major groove of DNA (Fig. 17.1.19A) . In the three-dimensional structures of complexes with DNA, additional contacts are also made through helix and loop residues, but base-specific contacts to DNA are mediated exclusively through side chains of residues in the β-ribbon. Binding of the tetramers to the two tandem operator sites is cooperative and occurs with limited distortion of B-form DNA. A second β-sheet motif for binding DNA is observed in the TATA box-binding protein (TBP), a component of the class II general transcription initiation factor TFIID that is required for preinitiation-complex formation with RNA polymerase II (Table 17 .1.6). TBP consists of a C-terminal region of ∼180 residues which is highly conserved across species, and a variable length N-terminal region. The crystal structure of TBP from Arabidopsis thaliana bound to the TATA-box DNA consensus sequence reveals a quasi-symmetric α/β structure composed of a curved ten-stranded β-sheet with four α-helices sitting on the convex side of the sheet with an overall shape resembling a saddle (Fig. 17.1.19B; Burley, 1996) . Two distinct loops project away from the protein on each end of the β-sheet forming stirrups for the saddle. DNA containing the TATA box consensus sequence binds to the concave surface formed by the eight central strands of the βsheet with an induced fit mechanism resulting in remarkably distorted DNA that is partially unwound and bent almost 90°. TBP has marked intramolecular pseudosymmetry with an ap- Current Protocols in Protein Science Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds proximate two-fold axis passing through the center of the protein perpendicular to the βsheet. The primary sequence of TBP can be divided into two long repeats (89 to 90 residues each) related by 30% sequence identity. The three-dimensional structure of each half is topologically identical with a root-meansquare (rms) deviation between equivalent Cα positions of 1.1 Å. Several other protein structures are observed to contain a fold similar to one TBP repeat (as opposed to two); however, none of them use the β-sheet to bind DNA. A third family of proteins that use β-ribbons to bind DNA is the highly conserved histonelike HU protein family (Table 17 .1.6). These are prokaryotic dimeric proteins that bind DNA nonspecifically to form nucleosome-like particles containing negatively supercoiled DNA. The crystal structure of a 19-kDa uncomplexed homodimeric HU protein (also known as DNAbinding protein II) from Bacillus stearothermophilus reveals a V-shaped protein consisting of a six-helix bundle with two three-stranded, curved, antiparallel β-sheets extending out from the surface to form an open cradle (Fig. 17.1.19C; Tanaka et al., 1984) . The crystal structure of a similar protein, heterodimeric integration host factor (IHF) from E. coli, complexed with DNA (Rice et al., 1996) , reveals that the two β-sheets wrap around the DNA along the minor groove inducing a 160° bend in the DNA (Fig 17.19D ). The structures of several families of Ig-like transcription factors have been elucidated (Table 17.1.6). Each of them uses an Ig-like fold with C2-type (also known as s-type) topology to bind DNA through loop regions at one end of the β sandwich (see Immunoglobulins and Immunoglobulin-Like Superfamilies for a discussion of Ig folds). The SCOP database classifies these proteins as the superfamily of p53like transcription factors  see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics for SCOP database). Although the individual structures and binding modes vary somewhat among these families, three common loops are used by all six families to contact DNA (Rudolph and Gergen, 2001) . The loop between strands A and B (AB loop, sometimes referred to as the recognition loop) interacts with the major groove, making sequence-specific contacts. The loop between strands E and F (EF loop) contacts the DNA backbone, in some cases making basespecific contacts in the minor groove, and the C-terminal tail emanating from strand G sits in the major groove, making base-specific contacts. The structural details of these families are described below. The first of these families to be examined structurally, p53 tumor supressors (Table  17 .1.6), can bind DNA as a monomer (Cho et al., 1994) . p53 tumor suppressors are key proteins facilitating protection against many types of cancer in animals. It is estimated that up to one-half of all cancers involve genetic inactivation of p53 (Vogelstein, 1990) . In this structure, the major groove-binding C-terminal tail is an α-helix and the EF loop is stabilized by a zinc atom (Fig. 17.1.19E ). The NF-κB transcription factors are part of the larger Rel family of transcription factors containing a Rel homology region (RHR). They function as homo-and heterodimers; each monomer being composed of two Ig-like domains. The first domain is a DNA-binding C2type fold with an extension of strand E (designated E′) and an additional insert of two antiparallel α-helices between strands E and F. The second domain has an E-type Ig fold that provides the dimerization contacts. The NF-κB dimer/DNA complex has been described as resembling a butterfly with a DNA torso and protein wings (Fig. 17.1.19F; Ghosh et al., 1995; Muller et al., 1995) . The NFAT family of transcription factors is similar to NF-κB in that its members possess a DNA-binding N-terminal C2-type Ig-like fold and a C-terminal E-type Ig fold. Furthermore, the DNA-binding domain has an additional helix inserted between strands E and F, two extra β-strands between C and C′, and an additional β-strand after strand E (E′). It is not surprising that the TonEBP (NFAT5) transcription factor forms the same type of dimeric butterfly complex with DNA as the NF-κB proteins with the added feature that its DNAbinding domains make dimer contacts as well, thus completely encircling the DNA (Stroud et al., 2002) ; however, other NFAT proteins bind DNA as monomers or bind DNA cooperatively with AP-1 transcription factors. The structure of a tetrameric complex of NFAT1/Fos/Jun/DNA (Chen et al., 1998b) shows the N-terminal domain interacting with DNA through the AB and EF loops and interdomain linker, as observed in other Ig-like transcription factors (Fig. 17.1.19G) . However, the C-terminal domain forms an acute angle with the N-terminal domain and maintains only minimal contact with the N-terminal domain, the bound DNA, and the neighboring Fos helix. The Fos and Jun helices interact extensively with the NFAT1 N-terminal domain resulting in a 20° DNA bend and a 15° bend in the middle of the Fos/Jun heterodimer (relative to the Fos/Jun/DNA complex (see Basic Region Leucine Zippers; Chen et al., 1998b) . The core binding factors (CBF) comprise a family of heterodimeric transcription factors. The α subunit (CBFα) has the C2-type Ig-like fold (Berardi et al., 1999; Nagata et al., 1999) for binding DNA and is encoded by several genes. The invariant β subunit (CBFβ) has an α/β fold consisting of a partly open sixstranded β-barrel with four α-helices packed against the top and bottom (Fig. 17.1.19H; Goger et al., 1999; Huang et al., 1999) . Although CBFβ does not interact with DNA itself, CBFα-DNA binding is apparently enhanced significantly by dimerization with CBFβ. Unlike the two Ig-like domains in the NFAT1/DNA complex, the CBF α and β subunits interact extensively with each other either alone or in complex with DNA (Fig. 17.1.19H; Warren et al., 2000; Bravo et al., 2001; Tahirov et al., 2001) . The T-domain (also known as T-box) transcription factors comprise a single C2-type Iglike domain with an additional two C-terminal helices (H3 and H4) that are capped at the DNA-binding end by several additional small twisted β-strands. The crystal structure of a Brachyury T-domain/DNA complex reveals a triangle-shaped dimer with the two T-domains forming the sides and the DNA forming the bottom of the triangle (Fig. 17.1.19I ; Muller and Herrmann, 1997) . The C-terminal α-helix (H4) has a rather unusual DNA interaction, being embedded deeply in the minor groove. The signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family of eukaryotic transcription factors includes large proteins (750 to 850 residues) that dimerize (homo-and heterodimers) upon phosphorylation and translo-cate to the nucleus. Crystal structures of STAT-1 and -3β homodimers bound to DNA reveal elongated, four-domain monomers forming an arc-shaped ternary complex with DNA (Fig. 17.1.19J; Becker et al., 1998; Chen et al., 1998c) . The N-terminal domain is a coiled-coil bundle of four antiparallel α helices. These helices project away from the DNA, have no interactions with DNA or the other monomer, and possess a primarily hydrophilic surface. The second domain is the DNA-binding domain. Like the other members of the Ig-like transcription factor superfamily, this domain is a modified C2-type Ig fold. The AB loop has an extra β-strand (A′), the CC′ loop contains an inserted α-helix (α5) and β-strand (X), the EF loop has an extra β-strand (E′), and β-strand G ends with an additional β-strand (G′). All three of the modified loops and the C-terminal tail participate in DNA binding. Following the Ig domain and prior to the SH2 domain is a helical connector or linker domain consisting of a bundle of four α helices and a small twostranded β-sheet. The SH2 domain (see Modular Domains Involved in Signal Transduction) binds a phosphorylated tyrosine from the C-terminal tail of the other monomer in the complex, effectively clamping the two monomers together. Relative to DNA, RNA is capable of folding into a much more diverse array of structural motifs. In addition to the standard A-form double helix, irregularities such as bulges, hairpin loops, helix unwinding, noncanonical basepairing, and unstacked bases are all common in RNA structures. This results in RNA-binding protein structural motifs designed to interact with various perturbations of the RNA A-helix rather than a focus on major-and minor-groove interactions as observed in DNA-binding proteins. Although numerous three-dimensional structures have been determined for RNAbinding proteins, many of these use either unique or less common folds to recognize RNA; however, a small group of RNA-binding modules with known structures are noted for their more widespread use in RNA-protein interactions. These include RNP, OB-type domains, dsRBP, KH domains, and zinc fingers. This group of folds, along with a handful of larger, more unique structures, are briefly described below and in  The RNP domain, also known as the RNA recognition motif (RRM) or consensus sequence RNA-binding domain (cs-RBD), is one of the most widely observed and well characterized RNA-binding domains (Burd and Dreyfuss, 1994) . It is identified in amino acid sequences by two highly conserved consensus sequences referred to as RNP1 and -2, within a more weakly conserved region of ∼80 residues. The SMART database lists over 3400 proteins containing RNP (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart. embl-heidelberg.de/browse.shtml ). The threedimensional structure of RNP domains determined in the early 1990s (U1A splicosomal protein; Oubridge et al., 1994) and the RNAbinding domain of hnRNP C (Wittekind et al., 1992 ) revealed a four-stranded antiparallel βsheet with two α-helices laying across one face with a βαββαβ topology. The crystal structure of the RNA-binding fragment of the U1A splicosomal protein complexed with a 21-nucleotide RNA hairpin showed that the RNA binds as an open structure to the exposed β-sheet surface opposite the helices (Fig. 17.1.20A ; Oubridge et al., 1994) . Two loops from one end of the β-sheet protrude through the middle of the RNA loop, positioning and stabilizing the RNA structure on the sheet, and preventing base pairing. This enables sequence-specific interactions to occur between the bases and both main-and side-chain atoms on the β-sheet. Although it has no sequence homology with RNP proteins, the ribosomal protein S6 has been observed to have the same fold with a topology identical to the U1A protein (Fig. 17.1.20B; Lindahl et al., 1994) . Similar α/β folding patterns have also been observed in the structures of other ribosomal proteins such as L6, L7/L12, and L30 (Lindahl et al., 1994) . The bacteriophage T4 regA translational regulator protein also contains two regions that have sequence homology to the RNP1-and -2 sequence motifs. This protein specifically represses the translation of 35 early T4 mRNAs. The 1.9-Å crystal structure of T4 regA consists of two antiparallel β-sheets (three and four strands, respectively) and four helices (Fig.  17.1.20C ; Kang et al., 1995) . The larger β-sheet contains the RNP1 and -2 sequence motifs in two adjacent β-strands exposed to solvent, and superficially resembles the RNA-binding βsheet in the U1A protein. The cold-shock proteins CspA and -B, from E. coli and Bacillus subtilis, respectively, are implicated in binding both RNA and singlestranded DNA, and each contain a region that has sequence homology with a canonical RNP domain. The structures of these proteins (Schindelin et al., 1993 (Schindelin et al., , 1994 Schnuchel et al., 1993; Newkirk et al., 1994) , however, consist of a five-stranded antiparallel β-barrel known as the oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide (OB) fold (Fig. 17.1.21A and B ; Murzin, 1993) . The RNP sequence motifs reside in two adjacent β-strands suggesting a possible RNA-binding site. A similar β-barrel structure is also observed in the ribosomal proteins S17 (Golden et al., 1993) and L14, and in the N-terminal anticodon-binding domains of both lysyl-and aspartyl-tRNA synthetases (Fig. 17. 1.21C-E; Cavarelli et al., 1993) . Since the early 1990s, nearly 100 unique protein structures with OB folds have been deposited in the PDB, revealing a remarkably versatile fold used to bind not only RNA, but also ssDNA, oligosaccarides, and proteins (Arcus, 2002) . Two other RNA-binding domains, the K homology (KH) and double-stranded RNAbinding domains (dsRBD), have structures that are similar in terms of general orientation of secondary structures (although not in topology) to the structure of the RNP domain. As with the RNP domain, these domains can be identified by a short consensus sequence. The three-dimensional structures for two dsRBD-containing proteins, E. coli RNase III (Kharrat et al., 1995) and Drosophila staufen protein (Fig. 17.1.22A; Bycroft et al., 1995) , and one KH motif-containing protein, human vigilin ( Fig.  17. 1.22C; Castiglone Morelli et al., 1995) , each contain a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet with two or three helices packed against one face to form an α/β structure, albeit with different topology. Furthermore, a topological variant of the canonical KH domain has been observed in the ribosomal protein S3 from T. thermophilus (Carter et al., 2001; Grishin, 2001) . Despite the superficial similarities in structure, the RNP, dsRBD, and KH domain RNA-binding structural motifs all appear to bind RNA by distinctly different modes. The dsRBD motif is proposed to interact with double-stranded RNA through the end loops of the β-sheet, the N-terminal end of the last helix, and a portion of one face of the β-sheet (Bycroft et al., 1995; Kharrat et al., 1995) . The KH Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology domain has been suggested to bind singlestranded RNA via the helical side of the domain (Gibson et al., 1993) . The N-terminal domain of ribosomal protein S5 (Fig. 17.1.22B) from Bacillus stearothermophilus shares a number of conserved residues with dsRBD of staufen protein in addition to a similar topology, suggesting it may bind RNA in the same way as a dsRBD motif (Bycroft et al., 1995) . The zinc finger structural motif already described in this unit as a DNA-binding motif (see Zinc-Containing DNA-Binding Motifs), has also been implicated in binding RNA. A well characterized example is the TFIIIA protein which binds both 5S ribosomal RNA and the DNA encoding the 5S rRNA gene (Burd and Dreyfuss, 1994) . The RNA-binding protein Rop (repressor of primer) from an E. coli plasmid helps regulate plasmid copy number by facilitating sense-antisense RNA pairing. This protein functions as a homodimeric four-helix bundle structure comprised of two helix-turn-helix monomers (Fig. 17.1.23A ; see above). Rop has no structural or sequence homology to any other known RNA-binding proteins (Predki et al., 1995) . The results of mutation studies combined with binding assays provide strong evidence that RNA binding occurs along one face of the bundle formed by helices 1 and 1′ (Predki et al., 1995) . One hundred and eighty copies of MS2 phage coat protein assemble to form the icosahedral viral capsid of the RNA bacteriophage MS2. Although comprised of the same amino acid sequence, the 129-residue MS2 subunits are present in the viral capsid in three structurally similar, but not identical, conformations referred to as A, B, and C (Valegard et al., 1994) . Icosahedral symmetry results in the formation of AB and CC dimers arranged in the capsid as trimers of dimers (Fig. 17.1.23B ). The dimers each consist of a ten-stranded antiparallel βsheet with two small β-hairpins and four helices packed against one face of the sheet. In addition to its structural role, this protein also prevents translation of viral replicase by binding to replicase mRNA. A nineteen-nucleotide RNA hairpin of the Shine-Dalgarno sequence for viral replicase diffused into crystals of empty phage capsid was observed crystallographically to bind specifically to AB dimers of MS2 coat protein (Valegard et al., 1994) . Crystal symmetry precluded crystallographic analysis of any RNA bound to the CC dimer. The RNA bound to AB interacts as a hairpin structure laying as a rigid crescent against the face of the β-sheet, opposite the helices, causing very little change in the protein structure relative to the unbound form of MS2. Trp RNA-binding attenuation protein (TRAP) from Bacillus Subtilis binds to mRNA for the tryptophan (trpEDCFBA) operon in the presence of tryptophan, inducing the formation of a transcription terminator structure, thereby halting expression of the operon as tryptophan concentrations increase (Antson et al., 1995) . The 1.8-Å crystal structure of TRAP in its activated form bound to tryptophan reveals a doughnut-shaped eleven-subunit oligomer containing 56% β-sheet ( Fig. 17.1.23C ). Each 75-residue subunit is composed of both a threeand four-stranded β-sheet packed face to face against each other. Tryptophan binds at one end of the interface between the two sheets in each subunit towards the center of the wheel. Adjacent three-and four-stranded β-sheets from neighboring subunits hydrogen bond to each other to form eleven seven-stranded β-sheets, each tilted in a way that resembles the blades of a turbine. Although the RNA binding site is not known, mutation analysis of both RNA and TRAP suggest that RNA containing eleven (G/U)AG elements forms a matching circle that binds to one side of the β-sheet wheel (Antson et al., 1995) . Elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) is one of several elongation factors that participate in the translation of mRNA into a protein sequence on the ribosome. The crystal structure of EF-Tu from Thermus aquaticus in a ternary complex with Phe-tRNA Phe and a GTP analogue shows a three-domain structure in which all three domains interact with tRNA (Nissen et al., 1995) . The N-terminal domain 1 is a structurally conserved G-protein domain which binds guanine nucleotide. Domains 2 and 3 are sevenand six-stranded β-barrels respectively. The 3′ CCA-Phe end of the tRNA binds in a cleft at the interface between domains 1 and 2 whereas the 5′ end of the tRNA binds at the interface of all three domains. The T-stem of the tRNA interacts primarily with the β-barrel in domain 3. Except for the terminal Phe side chain and terminal adenine, both at the 3′ end, EF-Tu interacts primarily with the ribose moieties and the phosphate backbone of the tRNA. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRS) are ATP-requiring enzymes that ligate amino acids to their cognate tRNAs during translation of RNA. The aaRS family of enzymes is remarkably diverse in terms of sequence, size, and three-dimensional structure. On the basis of sequence, structural analysis, and catalytic properties, aaRS can be divided into two classes, each comprising ten members (Eriani et al., 1990; Carter, 1993) . As of early 2003, there are over 100 three-dimensional structures of aaRS and various complexes in the PDB (Table 17 .1.8). These include bacterial and yeast aaRS for nineteen different amino acids (excluding alanine). Class I aaRS all share a classical dinucleotide-binding or Rossman fold in the catalytic domain (Fig. 17.1.24A ) and generally acylate the 2′ hydroxyl of the terminal ribose (see The Classical Dinucleotide-Binding Fold for a discussion of the Rossman fold). The two sequence motifs, His-Ile-Gly-His and Lys-Met-Ser-Lys-Ser (more generally known as Met-Ser-Lys) are both present in all class I enzymes in regions that bind ATP. Class I enzymes are generally single-chain polypeptides, except for MetRS, TyrRS, and TrpRS which are homodimers. The ten class I aaRS are further divided into three subclasses: Ia, -b, and -c (Cusack, 1995; Ibba and Soll, 2000) . Class II aaRS have a seven-stranded antiparallel β-sheet instead of a dinucleotide-binding fold in the catalytic domain ( Fig. 17.1.24B ) and primarily acylate the 3′ hydroxyl of the terminal ribose (except for PheRS which acylates the 2′ hydroxyl). The amino acid sequences of class II enzymes are identified by three different sequence motifs within the catalytic domain ( Fig. 17.1.24B ). The first sequence motif is involved in homodimerization, while the other two participate in catalysis. Eight class II enzymes are homodimers, two are α 2 β 2 heterotetramers (GlyRS and PheRS) and one is a homotetramer (AlaRS). Note that GlyRS comes in two varieties, a homodimer (E. coli) and a heterodimer. It is also noteworthy that there are two types of LysRS: class I and II. Like their class I counterparts, the class II enzymes are also divided into three subclasses: IIa, -b, and -c (Table 17.1.8; Cusack, 1995; Ibba and Soll, 2000) . Despite the strong conservation of catalytic domains observed within each aaRS class, the structures and arrangements of the other domains involved in RNA binding and dimerization are remarkably variable, even within certain subclasses. AaRS domains include α-helical bundles, β-barrels, α/β folds, and β-coiled-coils, among others. The sizes of single chains range from 300 to over 950 residues. Due to this variability, it is beyond the scope of this unit to describe each one or to develop structural classifications. Nascent polypeptide chains synthesized by ribosome machinery are targeted to different cellular compartments. All proteins with signal peptides are sorted for secretion or membrane location via signal recognition particles (SRPs), a ubiquitous machinery throughout all kingdoms of life. Although the structure of a holo-SRP is yet to be determined, fragments of SRPs with or without their bound RNA, and a fragment of SRP receptor have been solved (Table 17 .1.7). Eukaryotic SRPs consist of six proteins organized into two domains, the Alu domain and the S domain. The function of the Alu domain is to retard the ribosome elongation of a nascent polypeptide chain for targeting to endoplasmic reticulum. The S domain forms the core of the SRP by binding to the signal peptide and targets it to the SRP receptor-mediated translocation machinery. Both domains are organized around SRP RNA and are connected by RNA. The Alu domain contains a heterodimer of SRP9 and -14 bound to the 5′ and 3′ terminal SRP RNA. The crystal structure of a mammalian SRP9/14 dimer in complex with the 5′ RNA domain, and a construct containing both the 5′ and 3′ RNA domains has been solved ( Fig. 17.1.24C ; Weichenrieder et al., 2000) . SRP9 and -14 share a common fold of (αβββα topology with the two helices packed on the convex side of the three-stranded β-sheet. The SRP9/14 heterodimer is formed with the β-sheets aligning against each other forming a six-stranded antiparallel β-sheet with the four helices packed on one side of the β-sheet. The RNA domain that is recognized by SRP9/14 consists of the first 47 nucleotides of the 5′ RNA and 39 nucleotides from the 3′ RNA domain. The RNA assumes a helical conformation with a 180° re-verse bend in the middle at the SRP9/14 binding site. The S domain is formed by an SRP19, an SRP54 that contains a GTPase domain, an SRP68/72 heterodimer, and the core part of SRP RNA. The structure of a human SRP19 in complex with its cognate RNA has been determined ( Fig. 17.1.24D ; Wild et al., 2001) . SRP19 folds into a KH-like (K-homology) fold (see KH and dsRBP Domains) with a central three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet packed against two helices on one side of the sheet. It is different from the fold observed in SRP9 and -14, even though both have two α-helices packed against a three-stranded β-sheet. The core SRP54 comprises three domains, the amino-terminal N domain, the GTPase domain G, and the methionine-rich M domain that contains binding sites for signal peptide and SRP RNA. The structure of a Thermus aquaticus Ffh, a homolog of mammalian SRP54, showed that the N domain forms a four-helical bundle, and the G domain assumes a Ras-like GTPase fold with an insertion that is unique to the SRP family of GTPases (Keenan et al., 1998) . The M domain of Ffh in complex with domain IV of 4.5S RNA revealed that the five α-helices containing M domain recognizes the minor groove of SRP RNA by a helix-turn-helix motif (Fig. 17.1.24E ; Batey et al., 2000) . SRP receptor mediates the ER translocation of signal peptide containing proteins through binding to the signal peptide complexed SRP. The translocation depends on the hydrolysis of GTP through a GTPase domain of the receptor, the so-called NG domain. The structure of the GTPase-containing portion of FtsY, a functional homologue of the SRP receptor of E. coli, revealed a GTPase fold that is unique to SRPtype GTPases, including Ffh of SRP. Unlike the Ras-related GTPases, the SRP-type GTPases contain a small insertion domain of ∼29 amino acids called the I box, within the H-Ras fold. The I box comprises one β-strand flanked by two α-helices. Preceding the GTPase domain is a four helical bundle domain, called the N domain ( Fig. 17.1.24F ; Montoya et al., 1997) . Lectins represent a structurally diverse group of proteins that bind carbohydrate specifically. They are widely distributed throughout plants, animals, and even viruses, as well as bacterial toxins. Although often weak in binding monosaccharides, many lectins function as oligomeric proteins to increase the valency and thus, the affinity of binding toward carbohydrate ligands. Despite their functional similarity, neither the mode of oligomerization (dimers, tetramers, and pentamers have all been observed) nor the mode of carbohydrate recognition are strictly conserved in members of this family. Some members require Ca 2+ or Mn 2+ for saccharide binding, while others are thiodependent (Sharon, 1993; Drickamer, 1995; Rini, 1995a,b) . Lectins can be divided into subtypes according to their structural homology. For the purpose of this overview, four more frequently observed subtypes are discussed: the legume and cereal lectins in plants, and the S-type and C-type lectins in animals (Table  17 .1.9). β-trefoil lectins are discussed above (see Secondary Structure). Generally, members within each subtype of lectin share much higher degrees of structural conservation and conservation in carbohydrate recognition than the members of different subtypes. Lectins from various leguminous plants have very homologous three-dimensional structures and share similar locations for the carbohydrate recognition site. They often form dimers or tetramers and require both Ca 2+ and Mn 2+ ligated to each domain for carbohydrate binding. The general fold consists of a thirteenstranded β-sandwich formed from a sixstranded flat β-sheet packed against the convex face of a seven-stranded curled β-sheet. The carbohydrate-binding site is located on the outside concave portion of the seven-stranded βsheet ( Fig. 17.1.25A ; Dessen et al., 1995) . Although the general topology (i.e., connectivity and strand order) is preserved in legume lectins, some members of the family do have deleted or inserted β-strands, or permutated termini. Lectins usually have their N and C termini close to each other in structure. This makes termini permutation particularly simple without disrupting the overall structure. For example, the N-and C-termini for ConA from jack bean are located at the respective N-terminal end of strand F and the C-terminal end of strand E of soybean agglutinin (Fig. 17.1.25A ). Wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) represents a member of plant chitin-binding lectins that are specific for both N-acetylglucosamine and Nacetylneuraminic acid (sialic acid). It functions as a homodimer of 17-kDa subunits. The X-ray Supplement 35 Current Protocols in Protein Science Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds crystal structure of WGA shows that each monomer contains four domains, each with four disulfides, and has a tertiary structure consisting mostly of loops and a few one-turn α-helices with no regular β-structure ( Fig.  17.1.25B ; Wright and Jaeger, 1993) . Other structurally homologous cereal lectins include hevein (Rodriguez-Romero et al., 1991) and Urtica dioica agglutinin (UDA; Saul et al., 2000) . This family of animal lectins is characterized by a conserved ∼120 amino acid Ca 2+dependent carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD) that is often associated with other functional domains to mediate cell adhesion and other cellular signaling events. Members of this group include endocytic glycoprotein receptors, macrophage receptors, selectins, and the soluble collectins. Each CRD consists of a set of five to seven short β-strands forming two abutting β-sheets that are sandwiched between two α-helices. The carbohydrate-binding site is located in loop regions at one end of the β-sheet (I-G-H; Fig. 17 .1.25C; Weis et al., 1992; Graves et al., 1994; Boyington et al., 1999) . Calcium ions are directly involved in the binding of saccharide. A much larger superfamily of proteins referred to as C-type lectin-like proteins is now being structurally characterized. Many of these proteins do not have calcium or carbohydrate binding sites even though they share the same fold. These include numerous cell surface receptors, particularly in the immune system. S-lectins are a family of thio-dependent, β-galactoside-binding proteins that have been proposed to play important roles in modulating cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions (Hirabayashi and Kasai, 1993) . Galectins are the best known examples of this family. They often form dimers or associate with other accessory domains. Crystal structures of galectin-1 and -2 show a striking structural homology with legume lectins with the exception of a few inserted and deleted strands (Liao et al., 1994; Lobsanov et al., 1993) . Each monomer folds into a curled β-sandwich with the flat sheet consisting of five β-strands and the curled sheet consisting of six β-strands (Fig. 17.1.25D) . Although the carbohydrate binds on the concave portion of the curled sheet, similar to those in legume lectins, the specific mode of saccha-ride recognition is not conserved between legume lectins and galectins. The EF-hand is the most commonly observed Ca 2+ -binding motif in proteins (Satyshur et al., 1988; Nakayama and Kretsinger, 1994) . As of early 2003, the SMART database listed over 2000 proteins with this domain (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/browse.shtml) . Examples of EF-hand-containing proteins include calmodulin, troponin C, essential lightchain and regulatory light-chain myosin, parvalbumin, intestinal and sarcoplasm calciumbinding proteins, calcineurin B, recoverin, and extracellular matrix protein BM-40 (Table  17 .1.10). There are two kinds of Ca 2+ -binding sites among the EF-hand motif proteins: high and low affinity. The high affinity Ca 2+ -binding sites appear to primarily provide structural stability to proteins, whereas the low affinity sites often function to regulate the active protein conformations, and hence are also termed regulatory sites. For example, calmodulin undergoes a conformational change upon binding of Ca 2+ ions to the regulatory sites (Meador et al., 1992) . Both crystal structures and NMR structures of a number of EF-hand proteins have been solved (Herzberg and James, 1988; Satyshur et al., 1988; Meador et al., 1992; Svensson et al., 1992; Flaherty et al., 1993; Rayment et al., 1993; Findlay et al., 1994; Xie et al., 1994; Hohenester et al., 1996) . A typical EF-hand consists of a helix-loop-helix arrangement with the two helices oriented ∼90° to each other and the Ca 2+ -binding site located in the loop region ( Fig. 17.1.26A ). In most situations, they form pairs with the two EF-hands in a pair related by approximately two-fold symmetry. The Ca 2+ coordination is usually described as a pentagon bipyramid geometry with a total of six to seven ligands which are from the carboxylate groups of Asp, Glu, and main chain carbonyl oxygens in the loop region. Water molecules are often found to provide one of the apical coordinations. Annexins are a family of calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding proteins. Unlike the classical EF-hand calcium-binding proteins, the annexins chelate calcium in an entirely different way (Huber et al., 1990a (Huber et al., ,b, 1992 Bewley et al., 1993) . Each calcium-binding (Fig. 17.1.26B) . The coordination geometry is that of a pentagonal bipyramid with three ligands from the backbone carbonyl oxygen groups of the residues in the AB loop (the loop between helices A and B). The three ligands are each separated by one amino acid in the sequence. Two other ligands are provided by the side chain carboxylate of a Asp or Glu residue, located at the end of helix D, 44 amino acids downstream from the first carbonyl ligand of the AB loop. The six and seventh ligands are less conserved and can be replaced with water molecules. Nucleotide-binding folds first began to be characterized in the early 1970s as the structures of several NAD cofactor-containing dehydrogenases were elucidated . It was observed that single domains with conserved folding patterns were responsible for nucleotide-binding in many proteins. With the structural determination and analysis of many more nucleotide-binding proteins, this particular fold has been divided into three primary classes: dinucleotide-binding domains, the mononucleotide-binding fold, and the actin fold; however, not all nucleotide-binding proteins have these folding patterns. Proteins such as the class II aaRS (containing an antiparallel β-sheet for binding ATP) and some FMN-binding proteins (TIM-barrel structures), among others, have very different folds for interacting with single nucleotides. To avoid confusion, the di-and mononucleotide-binding folds discussed in this section (Table 17 .1.11) are usually referred to in the literature as classical or canonical nucleotide-binding folds and the dinucleotide-binding fold is sometimes referred to simply as the Rossman fold. In general, classical (canonical) dinucleotide-binding proteins fall into one of three groups: NAD(P)-dependent dehydrogenases and oxidoreductases, FAD-linked oxidoreductases, and FAD/NAD-linked oxidoreductases. Although many of these proteins are multidomain α/β structures, their dinucleotide-binding domains typically have a common three-dimensional fold. These binding domains contain a central five-or six-stranded parallel sheet, strand order 3-2-1-4-5-6, connected to helices on each face through right-handed loops (Table  17. 1.11; Fig. 17.1.27A ). The conserved topol-ogy for this α/β/α sandwich motif as compiled by G.E. Schultz (1995) and A.M. Lesk (1995) is illustrated in Figure 17 .1.27B. In each case, the dinucleotide binds across the C-terminal end of the sheet with the ADP portion interacting specifically with the central βαβ unit of this fold (β1-α1-β2). The core sequence motif (also called the fingerprint sequence) for this βαβ fold is Gly-X-Gly-X 2 -Gly (where X is any amino acid) and is located in a loop between β-strand 1 and helix 1. This sequence permits unusual main chain dihedral angles in the binding loop and close contacts with ADP. The pyrophosphate moiety sits at the N-terminal end of the helix following the loop, a favorable environment for the negative charges (Wierenga et al., 1985) . Another conserved feature is an Asp or Glu residue at the C-terminal end of the second β-strand of the βαβ unit for binding the ribose moieties of NAD and FAD, respectively. NADP-binding domains contain an Arg at this position for binding the 2′-phosphate (Schultz, 1992) . One additional eleven-residue sequence motif has been located in β-strand 5 of the canonical dinucleotide binding fold in FAD-binding domains which includes a C-terminal aspartic acid that interacts with the ribitol moiety of FAD (Eggink et al., 1990 ). First noted in the structure of adenylate kinase ( Fig. 17.1.27C ; Schulz et al., 1974) , the mononucleotide-binding fold is superficially very similar to the dinucleotide-binding fold (above), but has a different topology. This fold also consists of an α/β/α sandwich with a central five-stranded parallel β-sheet and righthanded connections to helices (Table 17. 1.11, Fig. 17.1.27C and D; Schultz, 1992) . The strand order is 2-3-1-4-5. As in the case of the dinucleotide-binding fold, mononucleotide binds to a critical glycine-rich loop at the C-terminal end of the β-sheet between strand 1 and helix 1. This loop (also referred to as the P-loop) is much longer than the shorter dinucleotidebinding loop, enabling it to form a giant positively charged anion hole for interacting with the mononucleotide triphosphate moiety (Dreusicke and Schulz, 1986) . The loop's core sequence motif, Gly-X 2 -Gly-X-Gly-Lys (where X is any amino acid) has been used to identify many more mononucleotide-binding proteins including some from the more distantly related GTP-binding proteins (also known as G proteins) which also have a P-loop (Saraste et al., 1990; Schultz, 1992 1994) . Slight variations of the mononucleotidebinding fold include the flavodoxin-like and the resolvase-like proteins. In these families, the first β-strand is displaced to create a strand order of 2-1-3-4-5 instead of 2-3-1-4-5. Furthermore, in the resolvase-like fold, the fifth β-strand is antiparallel to the rest. G proteins have an extra sixth strand in the β-sheet with strand order 2-3-1-4-5-6 and the second βstrand is antiparallel to the rest. Other variations include protein structures that do not contain the canonical P-loop fingerprint sequencee.g., CheY chemotactic protein; Volz and Matsumura, 1991) , γδ-resolvase (Sanderson et al., 1990) , flavodoxin (Watenpaugh et al., 1972) . Further perturbations of the mononucleotidebinding fold are listed under the heading Fold: P-loop Containing Nucleotide Triphosphate Hydrolases in the SCOP database (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://scop. mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop/index. html) . It should also be noted that some mononucleotide-binding proteins, such as adenylate kinase, also bind monophosphate nucleotides in a distinctly different binding site, albeit close in proximity to the classical site discussed in this section. Polymerases are fundamentally important enzymes responsible for replication, repair, and transcription of DNA and RNA in all living organisms. The structures of these enzymes vary widely from small single-subunit proteins of only a few tens of kilodaltons in size to large multisubunit complexes approaching 1000 kDa (Joyce and Steitz, 1994) . DNA polymerase and some small RNA polymerases have a central catalytic domain responsible for DNA binding, nucleotide binding, and phosphoryl transfer. The three-dimensional structures of the single-chain catalytic domains of several different nucleic acid polymerases from eukaryotic, prokaryotic, and viral organisms have been solved (Table  17 .1.12). These include DNA polymerase structures from the Pol I (A family), Pol α (B family), Pol β (X family), lesion-bypass polymerase (Pol Y family), and reverse transcriptase (RT) families. In addition, there are structurally homologous eukaryotic poly(A) RNA polymerases and viral RNA polymerase structures from the T7 RNA polymerase family, the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase family, and the double-stranded (ds)phage RNA-dependent RNA polymerase family. Including mutants and structures of polymerases complexed with DNA, nucleotides, drugs, and various salts, the number of PDB entries is now in the hundreds (see Web-Based Structural Bioinformatics and http://www.rcsb.org/pdb). Despite numerous structural differences, the single-chain catalytic domains of the abovementioned polymerases each possess a common arrangement of subdomains centered around a large nucleotide-binding cleft which can be loosely described as a U-shaped structure resembling a person's right hand. Using nomenclature introduced by Ollis et al. (1985) , the central base of the structure is referred to as the palm subdomain, and the two vertical walls of the U are called the fingers and thumb subdomains ( Fig. 17.1.28A ). It is noteworthy that bovine and yeast poly(A) RNA polymerases do not have a thumb subdomain (Bard et al., 2000; Martin et al., 2000) . The palm catalyzes the phosphoryl transfer reaction, the fingers are involved in template positioning, and the thumb may be important in DNA binding and processivity (Hubscher et al., 2002) . Structures of polymerase/DNA and polymerase/DNA/dNTP complexes suggest that the thumb and finger subdomains in some cases make dramatic movements during different stages of the polymerization reaction (Fig. 17.1.28B ; Beese et al., 1993; Pelletier et al., 1994; Franklin et al., 2001) . Associated catalytic functions distinct from polymerase activity, such as the 3′-5′ exonuclease activity in the Klenow fragment (KF) of E. coli DNA polymerase I, RNase activity in RT, 5′-nuclease activity of pol-β and Taq polymerase, and nascent RNA binding by T7 RNA polymerase, are located in separate N-or C-terminal domains. Still more related functions reside in associated subunits. The central palm is the most structurally conserved subdomain among polymerases. It consists of a threeto six-stranded antiparallel β-sheet with two helices packed against one face of the sheet (Fig  17.1.28C) , a structure similar to the RNP motif found in many RNA-binding proteins (see KH and dsRBP Domains). The exposed side of the sheet displays the conserved active site Asp residues. With regard to this subdomain, however, the eukaryotic β polymerase and eukaryotic poly(A) RNA polymerases are unique (Davies et al., 1994; Sawaya et al., 1994; Bard et al., 2000; Martin et al., 2000) . Although the palm subdomain has a similar α/β sandwich fold, the overall topology is quite different (Fig  17.1.28D) . In contrast to the palm subdomain, the fingers and thumb subdomains appear to be functionally related rather than structurally analogous between polymerase domains. For example, the thumb subdomains of KF, Taq polymerase, and T7 RNA polymerase all consist of a helical bundle with one or two long helices; however, the thumb subdomains of pol-β and RT are α/β structures each having three α-helices and one or two β-strands, respectively. Finger subdomains are similarly divergent. The Y family polymerases have an additional conserved α/β domain sometimes referred to as the little finger (Ling et al., 2001) . The eukaryotic poly(A) RNA polymerases have an additional C-terminal domain with an RRM-like fold (see The RNP Domain) that is known to interact with the RNA primer (Bard et al., 2000; Martin et al., 2000) . Not only are the folds of the subdomains variable, but the order of the subdomains within the primary sequence differs as well in various polymerases . Moreover, RT functions as a heterodimer (p66/p51) while other homologous polymerase domains function as monomers. Interestingly, the p51 subunit of RT results from the cleavage of the C-terminal RNase H domain from p66. Thus, both p51 and p66 have the structurally equivalent thumb, fingers, and palm subdomains. In addition, both RT subunits also contain another α/β subdomain termed the connection subdomain, which bridges the RNase H and polymerase domains in the larger subunit (Jacobo- Molina et al., 1993) . P66 and p51 differ dramatically in the spatial arrangement of their subdomains ( Fig.  17.1.28E ), resulting in two morphologically and functionally asymmetric subunits, with the polymerase activity residing only in the larger p66 subunit (Jacobo- Molina et al., 1993; Joyce and Steitz, 1994) . The bacterial, archeal, and eukaryotic DNAdependent RNA polymerases (RNAPs) are responsible for the transcription of DNA into RNA during gene expression. All known RNAPs including eukaryotic RNAP I, II, and III are members of a conserved protein family also known as the multisubunit RNAP family (Ebright, 2000) . Structurally, RNAPs superficially resemble the DNA and viral RNA polymerases described above in that they possess a U-shaped structure; however, RNAPs are much larger, more complicated multisubunit enzymes that have a rather different architecture. The crystal structures of the prokaryotic core RNAP and holoenzyme RNAP from Thermos aquaticus, and eukaryotic RNAP II from Saccharomyces cerevisiae each reveal a large crabclaw-shaped molecule with a molecular weight of ∼400 to 500 kDa (Fig. 17. 1.28F and H; Zhang et al., 1999; Cramer et al., 2000 Cramer et al., , 2001 Murakami et al., 2002a; Vassylyev et al., 2002) . The active site is found in the bottom of a deep channel between the two pincers of the claw. For clarity, most of following description of RNAPs is based on the simpler structure of the bacterial form rather than the structure from yeast. The bacterial core RNAP is composed of five subunits (α 2 ββ′ω). The holoenzyme additionally incorporates a σ initiation factor that is essential for transcription initiation. In general terms, the β and β′ββ′ω subunits make up the two arms of the claw, respectively, and the two identical α subunits cap the end of the molecule opposite the claw opening ( Fig. 17.1.28F) . The ω subunit sits on the outer surface of the β′ subunit and the σ 70 subunit straddles the ends of both pincers on one side of the claw, interacting with β and β′. The α subunit N-terminal domain (NTD) consists of two α/β subdomains (Fig. 17.1.28G ; Zhang and Darst, 1998; Zhang et al., 1999) . Subdomain 1 is a four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet packed against two nearly orthogonal α-helices along one face. The second subdomain comprises a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet flanked on one face by two twostranded β-sheets and one α-helix. The two α-subunits dimerize through antiparallel helix interactions of the two helices in subdomain 1. The C-terminal domain (CTD) of the α subunit is not visible in the RNAP complex, but NMR studies have revealed a compact fold consisting of four small helices. The first three helices are nearly perpendicular to each other, while the fourth is antiparallel to the third (Jeon et al., 1995) . The ω subunit consists of a small four-helix bundle and a β-hairpin. The σ 70 initiation factor of the T. aquaticus holoenzyme is an elongated all-helical protein comprising three domains (Fig. 17.1.28F, dark blue) . The second and third domains are separated by a long linker region (Murakami et al., 2002a; Vassylyev et al., 2002) . Crystal structures of E. coli σ 70 and T. aquaticus σ A factors reveal similar all-helical subunits (Malhotra et al., 1996; Campbell et al., 2002) . A helix-turn helix motif (see Helix- Current Protocols in Protein Science Turn-Helix Motif) in σ A is observed to make critical interactions with the promoter DNA (Campbell et al., 2002) . The β and β′ subunits are rather complicated α/β polypeptides with eight and six structural domains, respectively. Due to their complexity, these two subunits are not described in this overview. For a detailed analysis of these two subunits, see Cramer et al. (2001) for the structurally homologous yeast RNAP II in which subunits RBP1 and -2 are equivalent to β′ and β subunits, respectively. The RNAP II complex from yeast consists of ten subunits (RBP1 to -10; Fig. 17.1.28H) . Five of the yeast subunits (RBP1, -2, -3, -11, and -6) correspond in structure and function to the five bacterial subunits (β′, β, α I , α II , and σ, respectively). In fact, R. Ebright (2000) has detailed remarkably extensive structural similarity between the bacterial and yeast RNAP complexes ranging from the general subunit locations to the folding topologies of individual domains. The yeast RNAP II structure has an additional five subunits, most of which decorate the outer surface of the 'claw', away from the internal channel ( Fig. 17.1.28H ; Cramer et al., 2001) . Certain DNA polymerases, such as those involved in replication, require a highly processive polymerase complex. The characteristic of processivity is conferred upon polymerases by associated processivity factors that tether the polymerase to DNA in an ATP-dependent manner in order to prevent dissociation (Kong et al., 1992) . One type of processivity factor known as a sliding clamp is a simple ring-shaped structure that both encircles DNA and interacts with the respective polymerase. The three-dimensional structures of several of these sliding clamps, including the β-subunit homodimer of pol III, the RB69 and T4 bacteriophage processivity factors, and PCNA, are each starshaped six-fold symmetric closed circular rings consisting of a circle of twelve α-helices perpendicular to the ring plane surrounded by six antiparallel β-sheets (Kong et al., 1992; Krishna et al., 1994; Shamoo and Steitz, 1999; Moarefi et al., 2000) . The inside diameter of both rings is 30 to 35 Å and the outer diameters are each ∼80 Å. Each ring is composed of six nearly identical domains, each of which is twofold symmetric, consisting of two fourstranded antiparallel β-sheets packed edge-toedge at a ∼45° angle with two antiparallel helices packed against the concave side of the domain (Fig. 17.1.29A) . The β-sheets of adjacent domains hydrogen bond to each other forming six curved eight-stranded antiparallel β-sheets that line the outer surface of the ring. The complete ring structure results from the 12-fold repeat of the simple topological structural motif βαβββ round the entire circle ( Fig.  17.1.29B ). Despite the striking structural similarity, there is only 15% sequence identity when individual domains from each protein are aligned (Krishna et al., 1994) . Sequence alignments of individual domains within the same protein give similar results. A head-to-tail dimer of the β-subunit of pol III forms the entire six-fold circle; each subunit comprises three domains. The bacteriophage RB69 and T4 rings, and the PCNA ring consist of trimers with two domains per subunit. ATP and auxiliary proteins are required for assembly around duplex DNA and dissociation does not occur easily, unless the DNA is linearized. In each case the ring has a substantial net negative charge and positively charged side chains are concentrated on the twelve α-helices lining the central channel, which should allow favorable interaction with the phosphate backbone of DNA passing through the channel (Kong et al., 1992; Krishna et al., 1994) . In addition, the orientation of helices facing the channel is such that they are nearly perpendicular to the phosphate backbone of B-form DNA, precluding specific interaction with the grooves. These physical characteristics, as well as the size of the inner diameter (30 to 35 Å), make both proteins well suited for encircling DNA in a manner that allows for unrestricted movement along a duplex DNA strand during polymerization. Finally, direct interaction has been observed between the T4 and RB69 sliding clamps and the corresponding DNA polymerases (Shamoo and Steitz, 1999) . In other systems, intermediate proteins facilitate this polymerase linkage. Topoisomerases are essential enzymes of eukaryotes, prokaryotes, and viruses that alter the topology of double-stranded DNA. They function by transiently breaking one or two strands of DNA, passing DNA through the opening, and then resealing the break (for reviews, see Wigley, 1995; Champoux, 2001) . Topoisomerases can be divided into two primary classes: type I enzymes which transiently cleave only one strand of DNA, and type II enzymes which cleave both DNA strands during catalysis. Supplement 35 Type I topoisomerases Type I enzymes are monomeric proteins which relax supercoiled DNA in an ATP-independent manner. They can also catenate and decatenate nicked double-stranded circles and form a double-stranded DNA circle from two complementary single-stranded circles. Subtype IA enzymes form a link to the 5′ phosphate of the DNA and subtype IB enzymes link to the 3′ phosphate. Subtype IA. The three-dimensional structures of the N-terminal catalytic fragments of two subtype IA enzymes from E. coli, topoisomerases I and III, reveal a common structural architecture (Lima et al., 1994; Mondragon and DiGate, 1999) . The N-terminal fragment is made of four distinct domains arranged around a large central channel with a diameter of 27.5 Å (Fig. 17.1.30A) . Domain I is a four-stranded parallel β-sheet sandwiched between two pairs of α-helices, a fold similar to the classical dinucleotide-binding fold (see above). Domain II is an unusual looking β-sandwich composed of two long-curving three-stranded antiparallel β-sheets that cross each other orthogonally at one end of each sheet. A single helix lies between the sheets at one end of the sandwich. The β-strands of this domain line the inside of the top half of the central channel, bearing a striking resemblance to the TATA-box binding protein (see DNA-Binding Proteins that use β-Sheet Motifs; Burley, 1996) . Domains III and IV are each primarily helical except for a small β-hairpin in domain IV. Domain III contains the active-site tyrosine, Tyr319, and closes one side of the central channel through an extensive interface with domains I and IV ( Fig.  17.1.30A ). This interface effectively buries Tyr319, suggesting that large conformational changes are required during catalysis. It has been proposed that domains II and III may move together as a rigid body away from domains I and IV, using a protease-sensitive region between domains II and IV as a hinge (Lima et al., 1994) . Such a movement would open a gate to the central channel and expose the active site Tyr319. The size of the closed channel is large enough to accommodate double-stranded B-form DNA without steric hindrance. The inner surface of the channel has a strong positive potential suitable for interaction with DNA. Subtype IB. Eukaryotic subtype IB topoisomerases share no structural or sequence similarity with prokaryotic subtype IA enzymes. Structural studies of an N-terminally truncated form of human topoisomerase IB (excluding an unstructured, highly charged ∼200 residue Nterminal domain) in complex with a 22-base pair DNA duplex reveal a five-domain protein structure that wraps around the DNA Stewart et al., 1998; Fig 17.1.30B and C) . Core subdomains I, II, and III are each α/β folds, the linker domain is a two-helix antiparallel coiled-coil, and the C-terminal domain is composed of five short helices. Subdomain II is noted to resemble the fold of the homeodomain family despite only 11% sequence identity and no evidence from the topoisomerase structure that it interacts with DNA . Additionally, subdomain III shows striking structural similarity to bacteriophage HP1 integrase . Finally, the coiled-coil of the linker domain superimposes with the Rop RNA-binding protein (see Four-Helix Bundle RNA-Binding Protein) with a root-mean square (rms) distance of 0.8 Å for 60 C α atoms . The catalytic Tyr723 resides in the C-terminal domain within the positively charged channel region. Like prokaryotic topoisomerase IA, the central pore is lined with positively charged side chains for interaction with DNA, and concerted movement of subdomains I and II is proposed to take place during the catalytic mechanism, allowing DNA to enter and exit the complex; however the proposed mechanisms for the two enzymes are quite different Stewart et al., 1998; Lima et al., 1994) . Type II enzymes are multimeric proteins with homologous amino acid sequences. The eukaryotic type II topoisomerases are homodimers, while the prokaryotic enzymes are A 2 B 2 tetramers where the A and B subunits correspond to the N-and C-terminal halves of the eukaryotic monomer, respectively; viral enzymes can have either subunit composition. Type II topoisomerases require ATP for catalysis and are capable of either relaxing DNA or introducing supercoils. Like the type I enzymes, they can also catenate or decatenate circular DNA. Crystal structures of the C-terminal half of yeast topoisomerase II, the homologous E. coli gyrA (gyrase subunit A), and the ATPase-containing subunit (gyrB) of E. coli gyrase complement each other and together provide a model for the structure of an intact type IIA topoisomerase. A crystal structure of the A subunit from Methanococcus jannaschii DNA topoisomerase VI provides insight regarding type IIB topoisomerases. Current Protocols in Protein Science Subtype IIA. The monomer structure of the C-terminal 92-kDa yeast topoisomerse II fragment reveals a modular crescent-shaped protein with five domains (Fig. 17.1.30D ). Berger et al (1996) divided the polypeptide chain into two subfragments, A′ and B′, based on their relation to the A and B subunits of the homologous bacterial enzymes. The N-terminal subfragment B′ has two domains, a Rossman fold-like five-stranded mostly parallel β-sheet (see The Classical Dinucleotide-Binding Fold for a discussion of the Rossman fold) sandwiched between four helices and a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet packed against one helix. The C-terminal subfragment A′ has three domains. Domain I consists of a winged-helix motif (see above) of three helices and a three-stranded antiparallel β-sheet embedded between an Nterminal α-helix, two short C-terminal α-helices, and a β-hairpin. The active site tyrosine residue, Tyr783 (Fig. 17.1.30E) , is located in a loop of the winged-helix at the bottom of a short tunnel leading to the protein surface. Domain II comprises a four-stranded antiparallel βsheet packed against two helices on one face and an abutting three-stranded antiparallel βsheet. The third domain of subfragment A′ consists of a six-helix bundle and a small βhairpin. Three of the helices are unusually long, causing this domain to project out from the rest of the protein. In the initial crystal structure, the two monomers come together to form a flat heart-shaped dimer with a large pear-shaped central cavity 60 Å high and 55 Å wide towards the base (Fig. 17.1.30E ). Although the primary dimer contacts occur at the A′-A′ interface, the B′-B′ interface involves extensive overlap of domains such that the B′ subfragment from one monomer interacts with the A′ subfragment of the other. At the interface between the first two domains in subfragment A′, a 20-to 25-Å groove runs across the protein surface including the region containing Tyr783. B-form DNA can be modeled into this groove with the recognition helix of the winged-helix motif lying in the DNA major groove (see Helix-Turn-Helix Motifs). A second crystal form of yeast topoisomerase II (Fass et al., 1999) and the structure of E. coli GyrA (Morais Cabral et al., 1997) reveal similar shaped dimers, but significant alterations in subdomain orientations between the three structures suggest a flexible complex that undergoes conformational changes during catalysis. The crystal structures of yeast topoisomerase II lack the N-terminal ATPase domain that is proposed to lie on top of the B′ subfragments; however, two crystal structures of the ATPase domain of the homologous E. coli gyrase B have been determined, enabling the modeling of the entire topoisomerase II structure (Wigley et al., 1991; Brino et al., 2000) . The 43-kDa fragment of DNA gyrase B is an elongated molecule consisting of two α/β domains each with a unique fold (Fig.  17.1.30F ). The first domain, which contains the ATPase site, is an eight-stranded mostly antiparallel β-sheet with five α-helices packed against the convex face. It binds ADPNP at the center of one face of the β-sheet with the phosphates coordinated by a glycine-rich loop at the N-terminus of a helix. The second domain (also referred to as the DNA capture domain) is a four-stranded mixed β-sheet surrounded by four helices, including one long C-terminal helix that protrudes away from the protein. In the gyrase B dimer, the most extensive interaction is through the N-terminal domains ( Fig.  17.1.30F) . A long 15-residue N-terminal arm from each monomer wraps around the other monomer contributing to the ATP-binding site. It is interesting to note that the binding of ATP is reported to induce dimerization (Berger et al., 1996) . The C-terminal domain forms dimer contacts only through one end of the protruding helix from each monomer. This dimer structure creates a large 20 Å-wide hole between the two C-terminal domains (Fig. 17.1.30F ). The C-terminal half of this hole is observed to be rich in Arg residues, suggesting possible interaction with DNA. Subtype IIB. The crystal structure of a truncated form (missing residues 1 to 68) of the A subunit from Methanococcus jannaschii DNA topoisomerase VI reveals a U-shaped homodimer (Nichols et al., 1999; Fig. 17.1.30G) . Each monomer consists of two domains linked by a short tether. The N-terminal domain has five α helices packed against a two-stranded β-sheet with a fold similar to the winged helix motif observed in catabolite activator protein (CAP; see Helix-Turn-Helix Motifs). The second domain consists of three subdomains. Subdomain I is a five-stranded antiparallel β-sandwich. Subdomain II has a Rossman fold consisting of a four-stranded parallel β-sheet flanked on each face by a pair of α helices ribose (see The Classical Dinucleotide-Binding Fold for a discussion of the Rossman fold). The last subdomain is an α/β structure comprising five α helices and a small two-stranded β-sheet. Apart from the winged helix motif, the Rossman fold, and a large central channel, this dimer is quite different from the known topoisomerase type I  The structures of a number of enzymes involved in polynucleotide transfer have been observed to have the same basic fold as ribonuclease H (RNaseH; Katayanagi et al., 1990 Katayanagi et al., , 1992 Yang et al., 1990) . Members of this family include RNase H, retroviral integrase, Holiday junction RuvC resolvase, TN5 transposase, the RNase H domain of retroviral reverse transcriptase, a core fragment of bacteriaphage Mu transposase, and the 3′-5′ exonuclease domains from several DNA polymerase structures, including the Klenow fragment (Ollis et al., 1985; Davies et al., 1991 Davies et al., , 2000 Ariyoshi et al., 1994; Dyda et al., 1994; Rice and Mizuuchi, 1995) . The sequence identity among family members is generally <15%. At the center of the structure is a five-stranded β-sheet, aligned with a strand order of 3-2-1-4-5. The second strand is antiparallel to the other four strands (Fig. 17.1.31) . The number and location of the helices are less conserved than the central β-sheet. Helices A and E are topologically more conserved than the other helices. They are located between strands 3 and 4, and at the C-terminal of strand 5 in sequence, primarily interacting with the central β-sheet. The number of helices between strands 4 and 5 varies, as do the helices after helix E (Fig. 17.1.31) . The family can be further divided into RNase-(e.g., HIV-1 reverse transcriptase RNase H, E. coli RNase H, Archeon Class II RNase H) and integrase-like structures (e.g., integrase, Mu A transposase, RuvC) with greater structure resemblance observed between the members of each subclass. Limited structural homology, particularly among the central five-stranded β-sheet, is also observed with Mut S domain II, actin-like ATPase domains, and ribosomal proteins L18 and S11. The three-dimensional structures of several ATP-binding proteins, including actin , the N-terminal domain of heatshock cognate protein (hsc70; Flaherty et al., 1990) , hexokinase (Anderson et al., 1978) , glycerol kinase (Hurley et al., 1993) , and acetate kinase (Buss et al., 2001) , have been found to contain a conserved structural motif referred to as the actin fold, despite the absence of any significant sequence homology (Table  17 .1.13). This fold consists of two α/β domains connected by a hinge region with the ATP binding site between them (Fig. 17. 1.32A-D; Kabsch and Holmes, 1995) . Each domain can be further divided into two subdomains. Two of the four subdomains (subdomains 1 and 3 according to actin notation) share a conserved core, a five-stranded β-sheet (with only one antiparallel strand) that is assembled as a β-meander surrounded by three helices. ATP binds at the interface between the β-sheets of subdomains 1 and 3. These two β-sheets are connected by two conserved helices and have identical topology, suggesting a gene duplication event. The other subdomains (2 and 4) are not as well conserved among these proteins, and may carry out specialized functions in different proteins sharing this fold. In actin, hsc70, and glycerol kinase, subdomains 2 and 4 are each α/β regions positioned at the C-terminal end of the sheets of the actin fold. Subdomain 4 has identical topology in the above three proteins, but a different tertiary structure in glycerol kinase (Hurley et al., 1993) . Hexokinase only has subdomain 4 (subdomain 2 is absent), which is an α-helical bundle. The assembly of actin to form filament, where it is the major component, and cortex is regulated by several actin-binding proteins, including profilin, gelsolin, severin, and villin. These molecules, through their association with actin, not only regulate cellular locomotion and shape, but also function as signaling molecules and keep actin filament in a dynamic balance between the free monomeric and polymerized forms. For example, profilin inhibits the assembly of F-actin by sequestering monomeric actin molecules, whereas gelsolin controls the actin cortex formation through fragmentation of F-actin filaments. The threedimensional structures of several of these actin-binding proteins has revealed their folds and helped to elucidate their functions in filament formation. Both the X-ray crystal and NMR solution structure of profilin determined to date show a single domain fold with a central five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet pack against four α-helices, two on each side of the sheet (Fig. 17.1.32E ; Schutt et al., 1993) . The β-sheet is curled toward the N-terminal α-helices on one side and Supplement 35 Current Protocols in Protein Science Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds the five strands are connected in the order of 1-2-3-4-5. Profilin, when complexed with βactin, forms two major contacts with its third helix, as well as the amino-terminal portion of the fourth helix and strands 4, 5, and 6. The members of the gelsolin superfamily include gelsolin, villin, and severin. The structure of the segment 1 domain of gelsolin shows the basic fold, which consists of a central fivestranded β-sheet flanked by two α-helices, one on each side of the sheet (Fig. 17.1.32F ; McLaughlin et al., 1993) . The central β-sheet contains mostly antiparallel strands with the exception of the last strand of the sheet, which is in parallel configuration. Spectrins are actin cross-linking proteins. Their associations with actin generate meshworks to support the plasma membrane and facilitate cellular interactions. The so-called spectrin repeat defines a segment of 100 to 120 amino acid and folds into a three-helix bundle (Fig. 17.1.32G ; Yan et al., 1993) . The observed repeats form a stable domain-swapped dimer in which the third helix of each monomer is exchanged in the helix bundle. A distinct protein fold, observed among several hydrolytic enzymes, has emerged in the last few years. These enzymes, including serine carboxypeptidases, microbial lipases, esterases, dehalogenases, peroxidases, and various small molecule-hydrolyzing enzymes, such as dienelactone hydrolase, share little or no detectable sequence homologies among them and differ widely in their catalytic functions (Table 17. 1.14; Ollis et al., 1992; Nardini and Dijkstra, 1999) . Nonetheless, they share the same structural topology and furthermore a conserved catalytic triad consisting of a nucleophile (Ser, Cys, or Asp) at the end of β-strand 5, an absolutely conserved His after β-strand 8, and an Asp or Glu residue at the end of β-strand 7 (Liao and Remington, 1990; Franken et al., 1991; Sussman et al., 1991; Noble et al., 1993; Nardini and Dijkstra, 1999) . The prototype of this fold consists of an eight-stranded mostly parallel β-sheet connected by one or more helices between adjacent strands (Fig. 17.1.33A and B). The strands are in the order 1-2-4-3-5-6-7-8 with strand 2 antiparallel to the rest. While the central eight-stranded β-sheet is well conserved among these enzymes, the length and number of helices spaced between the adjacent strands are less conserved and their positions vary significantly from enzyme to enzyme. The length and location of the loops connecting the secondary structure elements are also highly variable among members of this family. Sialidases and influenza neuraminidases form a family of glycohydrolases that cleave terminal α-ketosidically-linked sialic acids of many glycoproteins, glycolipids, and oligosaccharides. Structurally, they define a prototype with a β-propeller fold composed of six fourstranded antiparallel β-sheets arranged similar to a six-blade propeller (Fig. 17.1.33C ; Varghese and Colman, 1991; Burmeister et al., 1992; Crennell et al., 1993; White et al., 1995) . There is a six-fold pseudo-symmetry through the center of the subunit relating each of the six blades. The topological connections between the strands within each sheet and among the adjacent sheets are identical from blade to blade. Each β-sheet displays a typical righthanded twist with strands 1 to 4 running antiparallel from the center of the propeller to the edge. The connection between each adjacent blade is always through the fourth strand of the preceding sheet to the first strand of the connecting sheet. The active site is located near the center of the propeller (see Frequently Observed Secondary Structure Assemblies of Structural Motifs for further discussion). The TIM-barrel fold, also referred to as an α/β-barrel or (β/α) 8 fold, is one of the most frequently observed catalytic folds in protein structures. This fold is used by a multitude of different enzymes with very diverse functions and received its name from triose phosphate isomerase (TIM), the protein in which it was first discovered (Banner et al., 1975) . The threedimensional structure of the TIM-barrel is a rather elegant looking eight-stranded parallel β-barrel surrounded by a ring of helices that are essentially antiparallel to the β-strands (Fig.  17.1.34A and B) . Both the β-strands and the α-helices are inclined to the axis of the barrel. The classical topology of this structure is an array of eight tandem up-down β-α motifs which are aligned side-by-side in a parallel manner with consecutive strand order, eventually wrapping around to form a β-barrel ( Fig.  17.1.34C ). In some TIM-barrel structures, this array is not completely regular, containing instead small insertions in loop regions or, as in the cases of enolase and muconate lactonizing enzyme, missing a helix between the last two β-strands. To date all of the crystal structures in which the TIM-barrel has been found have been enzymes and in almost every case the active site is located within the loop regions at the C-terminal end of the barrel. The various proteases that have been examined structurally can be grouped into four primary classes based on characteristics of the active sites. First, serine proteases use an essential Ser as the active site nucleophile. Second, cysteine proteases require an active site Cys nucleophile. Third, aspartic proteases work primarily at low pH, utilizing two essential Asp side chains for catalysis. Finally, metalloproteases all contain a critical zinc atom coordinated at the active site. These four classes can be further subdivided into two or more different protein folds despite the fact that members of a particular class share nearly the same reaction mechanism. A fifth class that has been observed in proteasome complexes and which uses a Thr as the active site residue is also discussed in this section. Nearly all serine proteases contain the well known catalytic triad Ser-His-Asp in their active sites. The three side chains are positioned close together through tertiary structure and are hydrogen bonded to each other in a manner which causes the Ser hydroxyl oxygen to be a strong catalytic nucleophile. An exception is the cytomegalovirus protease which uses a similar Ser-His-His catalytic triad for the same purpose. Four completely different protein folds have been observed to date in this class of proteases. Each fold is described below. Trypsin-like serine proteases. Trypsin-like proteases are folded into two nearly identical domains, each consisting of a six-stranded antiparallel β-barrel with a Greek key topology (Fig. 17.1.34D ; Fischer et al., 1994) . In many cases, an α-helix is associated with each domain. The active site is formed from loop regions in a cleft between the two domains. Numerous eukaryotic, prokaryotic, and viral serine proteases have been observed to utilize this fold. Some of the more well known trypsin-like proteases include thrombin, elastase, chymotrypsin, plasmin(ogen), urokinase, and complement C1R and C1S proteases. At least three types of viral cysteine proteases also have the trypsin-like fold (see below). Subtilisns. The three-dimensional structures of subtilisns from prokaryotic and fungal organisms (Fig. 17.1.34E) show a common core folding pattern made up of a seven-stranded parallel β-sheet (strand order 2-3-1-4-5-6-7) sandwiched between two layers of α-helices . The active site is located at the C-terminal ends of the central β-sheet strands with the essential Ser residue situated at the N-terminus of an α-helix. Additions to this core fold in some subtilisns include a small two-to four-stranded antiparallel sheet positioned at the C-terminal edge of the large βsheet and a C-terminal β-ribbon hydrogen bonded to the main β-sheet (extending it by two strands). Serine carboxypeptidases. Serine carboxypeptidases are members of a larger family of enzymes known as the α/β-hydrolases (see The α/β Hydrolase Fold). These serine proteases contain a central, eleven-stranded, mixed, mostly parallel β-sheet (three more strands than the canonical α/β-hydrolase fold) surrounded by fifteen helices on either side of the sheet (Fig. 17.1.34F) . The β-sheet has a pronounced twist of almost 180°. As in the subtilisn class of proteases (see above), the active site is located at the C-terminal end of the β-sheet with the catalytic serine at the Nterminal end of a helix (Liao and Remington, 1990) . Herpes virus-like serine proteases. First observed in the structure of a serine protease from human cytomegalovirus (hCMV), the three-dimensional structures of these single-domain proteases consist of a seven-stranded mostly antiparallel β-barrel with one Greek key motif and seven helices surrounding approximately one half of the circumference of the barrel as well as both ends of the barrel (Qiu et al., 1996; Shieh et al., 1996; Tong et al., 1996) . This fold has subsequently been observed in Herpes simplex virus type II serine protease (Hoog et al., 1997) , Karposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus protease (Reiling et al., 2000) , and Varicella-Zoster viral protease (Qiu et al., 1997) . The active site Ser-His-His triad is positioned on the outside of the barrel on the face without any helices. This group of proteases is unique among serine proteases in that the tertiary structure of its catalytic triad contains a conserved His residue in the same position that the Asp residue is normally found in the classical Ser-His-Asp triad. These proteins func-  To date, three different subfamilies of cysteine proteases have been characterized, each of which utilize the sulfhydryl of a Cys residue as the active site nucleophile. The most well known and studied are the papain-like cysteine proteases which are sometimes confused with the entire cysteine protease family. Papain-like cysteine proteases. The proteases of this subfamily can be recognized by the conserved catalytic triad Cys-His-Asn, in addition to a unique fold. Analogous to the Ser-His-Asp triad of serine proteases, this hydrogen bonded triad is also formed through tertiary interactions resulting in a nucleophilic sulfhydryl on the Cys. The basic papain-like fold consists of two distinct domains designated L and R (papain nomenclature; Fig.  17.1.35A ). The L domain is a small three-to four-helix bundle. The R domain is comprised of a highly curved and twisted six-stranded antiparallel β-sheet flanked by one or two helices (Musil et al., 1991) . The active site is in a V-shaped crevice between the two domains. Similar to the subtilisns and serine carboxypeptidases, the nucleophilic cysteine residue is located at the N-terminal end of an α-helix. Although small structural variations of the described fold are observed in several papainlike proteases, bleomycin hydrolase from yeast has extensive structural modifications (Joshua-Tor et al., 1995) : a small helical domain is inserted into loops in the L domain and an additional N-terminal helical domain is also present. This cysteine protease, which cleaves the anticancer peptide bleomycin, functions as a hexamer with a large central channel containing the six active sites. It also binds to doubleand single-stranded DNA, and represses genes of the GAL system. Caspases. Cysteine-dependent aspartatespecific proteases (caspases) are a family of structurally homologous cysteine endopeptidases that are involved in processing proinflammatory cytokines and in apoptotic signaling (Alnemri et al., 1996) . The prototypic caspase structure, that of interleukin-1β-converting enzyme (ICE or caspase-1) is a tetramer made from two heterodimers related by a two-fold rotation axis. Each heterodimer (p10/p20) contains an independent active site and is derived from a 45-kDa precursor that has been cleaved in three locations. The fold of the heterodimer consists of a six-stranded mostly parallel β-sheet sandwiched between two helices on one face and four helices on the other (Fig.  17.1.35B ; Walker et al., 1994; Wilson et al., 1994) . The active site formed by loops at the C-terminal end of the β-sheet contains a catalytic Cys-His diad. The active site Cys is situated at the end of a β-strand instead of the N-terminus of an α-helix as in the papain subfamily. The crystal structures of several other caspases (i.e., caspase-3, -7, -8, and -9) have confirmed this unique fold and quaternary structure except for differences in substrate binding sites (see Wei et al., 2000; Chai et al., 2001; Renatus et al., 2001, and references therein) . Although caspases are mammalian enzymes, the crystal structure of the catalytic domain of a bacterial cysteine protease, gingipain R from Porphyromonas gingivalis, has been observed to have a very similar fold and a Cys-His diad at the active site (Eichinger et al., 1999) . The two subdomains within the single chain catalytic domain correspond to the small and large subunits of the caspase fold. Viral trypsin-like cysteine proteases. Another set of cysteine proteases that have been characterized structurally include the 3C and 2A viral cysteine proteases (Allaire et al., 1994; Matthews et al., 1994; Petersen et al., 1999) . They use a Cys-His-Glu/Asp catalytic triad and surprisingly have the same fold as the trypsinlike serine proteases (see above). The coronavirus cysteine protease also shares this fold but has an extra helical domain and a Val instead of Asp or Glu in the third position of the canonical catalytic triad (Anand et al., 2002) . The aspartic proteases (also known as acid proteases) contain primarily β-sheets and utilize two Asp residues to catalyze proteolysis at low pH. They are divided into two groups, the two-domain pepsin-like proteases found in eukaryotes and the dimeric retroviral proteases. Both groups contain a conserved catalytic triad sequence Asp-Thr/Ser-Gly at the active site and limited regions of sequence conservation are shared between them. Pepsin-like proteases. The pepsin-like proteases are comprised of two pseudosymmetric domains, each containing a partially opened, six-stranded, antiparallel, distorted β-barrel structure with a few short helices within the loop regions (Fig. 17.1.35C ; Davies, 1990) . Between the domains and away from the center of the structure, a twisted six-stranded antiparallel β-sheet lays against the surface of the protein as if to form a base on which to set the Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology molecule. Three strands from each domain contribute to the sheet. On the side of the protein opposite the six-stranded sheet, a large cleft runs across the domain interface forming the site for the polypeptide substrate to bind. The two catalytic Asp residues (one from each domain) are located at the bottom of the active site cleft (Fig. 17.1.35C) . A long hairpin loop from the N-terminal domain forms a flap which projects over the top of the active site shielding it from solvent. When pepsin-like proteases bind an inhibitor, the flap also participates in binding by clamping down over the inhibitor. Retroviral proteases. Retroviral proteases are homodimers that cleave newly synthesized viral polyproteins into individual functional units during viral maturation. The two identical subunits are structurally very analogous to the two domains of the pepsin-like proteases. Each is comprised of a six-stranded antiparallel βbarrel, a single helix located at one end of the barrel, and a two-stranded β-sheet at the C-terminal end of the helix (Fig. 17.1.35D ; Navia et al., 1989; Davies, 1990) . In the dimer, the two small β-sheets hydrogen bond to form a fourstranded β-sheet analogous to the six-stranded sheet observed in pepsin-like proteases. Two conserved, catalytic Asp residues (one from each monomer) are positioned at the bottom of the active site cleft at the subunits interface. A flap from each subunit extends over the top of the active site in a manner structurally and functionally resembling the flap of the pepsinlike enzymes. There are two main superfamilies of zinccontaining metalloproteases, each of which extend across both prokaryotes and eukaryotes: the zinc-dependent endopeptidases, also referred to as zincins (Bode et al., 1993) , and the zinc-dependent exopeptidases. Zincins. The conserved tertiary structure of the catalytic domain of zincins consists of a five-stranded mostly parallel β-sheet with two helices packed against the concave side Fig.17.1.35E ; Bode et al., 1993; Gomis-Ruth et al., 1994) . This fold is generally observed in the N-terminal domains of zincins. The conserved His-Glu-X 2 -His sequence motif identifies three critical active site residues. These three residues are in a helix situated at the edge of the β-sheet with the two histidines coordinating the catalytic zinc and Glu, polarizing a zinc-bound water that acts as a nucleophile during catalysis. Several zincins also bind multiple Ca 2+ ions. Zincins comprise two distinct families known as the thermolysin-like proteases and the metzincins. The known tertiary structures of thermolysin-like proteases have a small irregular twisted β-sheet structure at one end of the central β-sheet and a C-terminal helical domain with the active site in a crevice between the two domains. A conserved glutamate residue provides the fourth zinc ligand. The metzincins, which include astacins, adamalysins, matrix metalloproteases, and serralysins have an extended consensus sequence (His-Glu-X 2 -His-X 2 -Gly-X 2 -His), including a third zinc-coordinated histidine. The name metzincins comes in part from a unique structural characteristic of this family referred to as a Met-turn, which is a methionine-containing β-turn located just beneath the zinc atom (Bode et al., 1993) . It is noteworthy that one metzincin, an alkaline protease of the serralysins, has a particularly unusual C-terminal domain consisting of a calcium-binding 21-strand β-sandwich, also referred to as a right-handed parallel β-roll ( Fig. 17.1.35G ; Baumann et al., 1993) . Zinc-dependent exopeptidases. Zinc-dependent exopeptidases share a common catalytic fold consisting of an α/β/α sandwich. The central eight-stranded β-sheet (strand order 1-2-4-3-8-5-7-6) is mostly parallel (only strands 2 and 8 are antiparallel) and hosts the active site at the middle of its C-terminal end (Fig.  17.1.35F ; Burley et al., 1992) . Carboxypeptidases A, B, and T each have one active site zinc atom pentacoordinated to two His, a Glu (both oxygens are ligands), and a water molecule. The aminopeptidases in this family, however, each have two zinc atoms coordinated less than 3.5 Å apart at the active site. As with endopeptidases, zinc-bound water in this exopeptidase family is considered a possible nucleophilic catalyst (Strater et al., 1995) . The N-terminal nucleophile (Ntn) hydrolase fold is used by eukaryotic and archael proteasomes or proteasome homologues in prokaryotes (e.g., Hs1V; Table 17.1.14; Bochtler et al., 1999) . This fold has an αββα core structure consisting of a ten-stranded antiparallel β-sandwich flanked on each face by helices (Fig. 17.1.35H ; Brannigan et al., 1995) . The strand order for one sheet is 3-4-5-6-7 and the other is 8-1-2-9-10. A catalytic triad of Thr, Glu/Asp, and Lys forms at least part of the active site at one end of the β-sandwich and is highlighted by an essential N-terminal threonine nucleophile . Variations Current Protocols in Protein Science Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds of this fold (α-and β-subunits) are used to make large cylinder-shaped multisubunit complexes known as proteasomes or proteasome homologues that are responsible for protein degradation (see Proteasome for further discussion). Only certain β-subunits are catalytic and none of the α-subunits are. This same fold is also found in several other enzymes, such as glutamine PRPP aminotransferase, glucosamine 6-phosphate synthase, and various penicillin acylases, to name a few (Oinonen and Rouvinen, 2000) . Sequence homology is generally not conserved between these enzymes, nor is the identity of the catalytic nucleophile. Ubiquitin-targeted protein degradation plays an important role in protein degradation by proteasomes, in DNA repairs, and in selected signal transduction pathways (Hershko and Ciechanover, 1998) . A ubiquitin pathway involves three distinct steps. (1) E1-catalyzed ubiquitin activation which attaches the C-terminal Gly residue of ubiquitin to a Cys residue on E1 through a thioester linkage. (2) E2s-mediated ubiquitin conjugation that transfers the activated ubiquitin from E1 to the active site Cys residue of E2s. (3) Ligation of ubiquitin to substrate proteins by E3 ubiquitin ligases. Ubiquitin, a conserved protein of 76 amino acids, and all ubiquitin-like proteins fold into small αα/β structure with a five-stranded antiparallel β-sheet wrapped around an α-helix (sometimes referred to as a β-grasp; Fig.  17 .1.36A; Vijay-Kumar et al., 1987; Rao-Naik et al., 1998) . While there is usually one E1, there are multiple and diverse E2 and E3 enzymes, each specific for different protein substrates. The structures of ubiquitin-conjugating E2 enzymes solved to date include UbcH7, Ubc9, and a Mms2-Ubc13 heterodimer complex (Bernier-Villamor et al., 2002; Moraes et al., 2001; VanDemark et al., 2001; Zheng et al., 2000) . The catalytic core of E2 enzymes consists of ∼160 amino acids that fold into an α/β structure with its central four-to seven-stranded antiparallel β-sheet flanked by four α-helices (Fig. 17.1.36B and C) . The active site cysteine, which catalyzes the transfer of ubiquitin from E1 through a thioester linkage to E2, is located in a loop between the fourth β-strand and the second α-helix. The ubiquitin ligases (E3s) are a very diverse family of proteins whose function is to bring protein substrates into proximity with ubiquitin-conjugated E2 enzymes. The structural diversity of ubiquitin-ligases presumably reflects the need for specificity among diverse protein substrates. Common among E3s is their ability to bind E2 and specific protein substrates. There are two types of E3 enzymes, which differ in their ubiquitin transfer mechanisms. The HECT-type (homology to E6AP binding protein C terminus) ubiquitin ligases catalyze the transfer of ubiquitin by first forming an E3-ubiquitin thioester intermediate. The E6AP-Ubc7 complex is an example of an HECT-type E3 enzyme. In contrast, the RINGfamily ubiquitin ligases do not form an E3ubiquitin intermediate. They all have a RING domain that interacts with the E2-ubiquitin conjugate. Examples of RING-type ubiquitin ligases include c-Cbl (Fig. 17.1.36B ; Zheng et al., 2000) , members of the seven in absentia homolog (Siah) family ( Fig. 17.1.36D ; Polekhina et al., 2002) , and the SCF (Skp1-Cullin-F-box) family of E3 ligases (Fig. 17.1.36E ; Zheng et al., 2002) . The SCF members constitute the largest and most complex family of protein ligases and ubiquitinate a rather diverse range of proteins. The SCF complex consists of a protein-substrate-interacting subunit, Skp2, (Schulman et al., 2000) , an elongated two-domain cullin subunit (Cul1), a connecting unit, Skp1, that links the Skp2 F-box-containing protein with cullin, and a RING domain nested on cullin (Fig. 17.1.36E) . Human Skp2 has an ∼100 residue N-terminal domain of unknown structure, followed by an F-box, ten leucine-rich repeats (LRR; see Leucine-Rich Repeats for a discussion of the LRR fold), and a 30-residue tail with little secondary structure (Schulman et al., 2000) . The F-box is an ∼40residue domain comprising three helices, with one helix packing orthogonally against a pair of antiparallel helices. The N-terminal domain of Skp1 has an α/β fold consisting of a threestranded β-sheet packed on one face against a bundle of α-helices (also known as a BTB/POZ fold) and an additional two-helix extension (Schulman et al., 2000) . The N-terminal domain of Cul1 consists of three cullin repeats, each comprising a bundle of five α-helices (Fig.  17.1.36F ). The C-terminal domain of Cul1 is made of two winged helix motifs (see Helix-Turn-Helix Motifs), a four-helix bundle, and an α/β subdomain. The zinc-containing Rbx1 RING domain interacts closely with the C-ter-Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology minal domain of Cul1 and contributes one βstrand to the five-stranded β-sheet of the α/β subdomain. In addition to the more well known E2-E3 system, there is a family of small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMO), that regulate nuclear transport, stress response, and signal transduction controlling cell-cycle progression. The E2 enzymes for SUMO, as shown in the structure of a Ubc9-RanGAP1 complex (Bernier-Villamor et al., 2002) , can directly recognize and modify Lys residues on their protein targets without additional E3s. There are several superfamilies of proteins involved in processes of electron transfer. Most of them have a heme prosthetic group or porphyrin ring central to electron transfer coordinated in a hydrophobic pocket; however, their tertiary folds vary from the four-helix-bundle fold of ferritin to the mostly helical (multiple α-helices and some β-strands) structure of cytochrome P450, to the typical cytochrome c fold, with the polypeptide chain organized into a series of α-helices and reverse turns. Below are summaries of a few commonly observed folds in this category (Table 17 .1.15). Another group of electron transfer proteins, integral membrane respiratory proteins, is discussed below (see Respiratory Enzymes). Cytochrome P450 catalyzes the mono-oxygenation of a number of organic molecules in a heme-dependent reaction mechanism. There are now at least eight different types of P450 that have been examined structurally. These include P450 cam , P450 eryF , P450 BM-3 , P450 terp , P450 NOR , P450 2C5 , P450 sterol 14α-demethylase, and CYP119, each utilizing very different substrates. The sequence homology remains relatively high within each group but relatively weak between them. Despite low sequence homologies (<20%) and very diverse substrate specificities, a common fold is maintained among all the P450 cytochromes. The molecule folds into two domains, α and β (Fig.  17.1.37A) . The α domain consists of a righthanded four-helix bundle sandwiched between two clusters of helices, a top cluster of five helices, and a bottom cluster of three helices with two β-strands. The β domain consists of a β-barrel surrounded by three helices. The βbarrel is formed by two β-sheets, a two-stranded β-sheet, and a five-stranded β-sheet, folded against each other (Raag et al., 1993) . The heme molecule is embedded between the two domains. Cytochrome c is often observed as an electron transfer domain in many redox enzymes. Members of this family include cytochromes c, c2, c5, c551, c553, and c555. Other proteins, such as the N-terminal domain of cytochrome cd1-nitrite reductase, flavocytochrome c sulfide dehydrogenase (FCSD), and di-haem cytochrome c peroxidase, also contain cytochrome c-type domains in their structures. Most cytochrome c proteins contain one cytochrome c domain, but some enzymes, including FCSD and di-haem cytochrome c peroxidase, contain two. The typical cytochrome c fold consists of three long α-helices and a pair of β-strands packed in the core region, with two additional short helices surrounding the core (Fig. 17.1.37B ). The length of the helices, strands, and loop conformations vary considerably among the members of the family. The heme group is coordinated by residues from both helices and reverse turns in the core region (Louie and Brayer, 1990 ). The structure of cytochrome c3 from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans consists of three to four helices (often one long helix amidst other shorter helices), a pair of β-hairpins, and three to four long irregular loops (Fig. 17.1.37C ). There are four heme molecules ligated to the ∼110 residues of cytochrome c3. The heme coordination frame is formed by packing the long helix against the β-hairpins and the loop regions. In addition to cytochrome b5, the N-terminal domain of flavocytochrome b2 also belongs to this fold family. The structure folds into a α/β/α sandwich with a central five-stranded mixed β-sheet surrounded by six short α helices, two on the concave side of the β-sheet and four on the other (Fig. 17.1.37D ; Mathews et al., 1972) . The heme is coordinated by the four helices and the central two strands of the βsheet. The five strands are hydrogen-bonded in a 1-5-3-2-4 order in cytochrome b5 and 5-3-1-2-4 order in the cytochrome b5-type domain of flavocytochrome b2.  There are at least three families of cytochromes known to assume the fold of four-helix bundles: cytochrome b562, cytochrome c′, and ferritin. Among them, cytochrome b562 and cytochrome c′ share a close resemblance, both forming up-down-up-down helical bundles with a left-handed twist (Fig. 17.1.37E) . The heme is inserted between helices 1 and 4, with helix 3 forming the floor. The structure of ferritin, on the other hand, forms an up-downdown-up four-helix bundle with left-handed twist. There is a short one-turn helix at the C-terminal of the four-helix bundle. Unlike cytochrome c′ or b562, ferritin forms a dimer with only one heme molecule inserted at the interface of the two helical bundle subunits (Fig. 17.1.37F ; Frolow et al., 1994) . The helical globin-like proteins encompass three different families: globins, phycocyanins, and colicin. The core fold for all of these proteins consists of an α-helical sandwich which is simply two layers of α-helices stacked against each other. Using the globin nomenclature, helices A, E, and F make up one side of the sandwich, while helices B, G, and H make up the other, with helices on each side essentially orthogonal to those on the other (Table  17. 1.16, Fig. 17.1.38A ). Various members of these families are all completely α-helical (with the exception of flavohemoglobin), with minor differences in helix packing due to the binding of associated cofactors and insertions of helices to the basic fold (Holm and Sander, 1993; Ermler et al., 1995) . The globin family is made up of several heme-containing helical proteins used specifically for oxygen storage and transport within bacteria, insects, vertebrates, and plants. Myoglobin is the smallest of these proteins, consisting of the basic globin fold with the addition of two more short helices (C and D; Fig. 17.1.38A ; Phillips, 1980) . This monomeric protein binds oxygen for storage in muscle using a heme group located in a cleft between helices E and F. Mammalian hemoglobin is composed of four separate globin chains (α 2 β 2 ) in an approximately tetrahedral arrangement (Fig. 17.1.38B ; Fermi et al., 1984) . Each chain binds a heme group in the same location and orientation as in myoglobin. The binding of oxygen induces changes in the quaternary structure of hemoglobin such that four oxygen molecules are bound in a cooperative manner, making it well suited for oxygen transport. Other nonmammalian hemoglobins are found to have very different oligomeric states. Pig roundworm hemoglobin, for example, is an octamer of a two-domain globin fold (Kloek et al., 1993) , while sea cucumber hemoglobin can be present in both monomeric and dimeric states under physiological conditions. Flavohemoglobin is a rather unusual globin. Unlike the other known globin structures, flavohemoglobin is an α/β three-domain protein containing an FAD-binding domain and an NAD-binding domain as well as an N-terminal globin domain (Ermler et al., 1995) . The middle FAD-binding domain is a six-stranded antiparallel β-barrel with Greek key topology and the C-terminal NADbinding domain is a classical dinucleotide binding domain with a five-stranded parallel βsheet. Both redox domains share significant structural homology with both domains of ferridoxin reductase (Karplus et al., 1991) . The physiological function of flavohemoglobin remains unknown. Phycocyanins make up part of the light-harvesting antennae in cyanobacteria and red algae. The three-dimensional structure of this protein has the six helices of the globin fold with two additional antiparallel α-helices protruding from the N-terminus (Fig. 17.1.38C ; Schirmer et al., 1987) . A phycocyanobilin cofactor is located in the same place as the heme group of the globin structures (between helices E and F). Colicins are a class of multidomain antibacterial toxins produced by E. coli that participate in killing target cells by binding to surface receptors and forming pores in the cytoplasmic membrane. The crystal structure of a C-terminal fragment of colicin A is observed to have a canonical globin fold with three additional Nterminal helices and an extra C-terminal helix (Fig. 17.1.38D ; Parker et al., 1989) . The structures of toxins represent a collection of a diverse family of folds. Some toxins, such as scorpion and snake toxins, are relatively small, contain few well defined secondary structure elements, and are rich in disulfides, while others, such as diphtheria toxin and heatlabile toxin, have well defined secondary structures and often form complicated mutidomain Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology oligomeric organizations. Numerous toxin structures have been determined by X-ray crystallography or NMR, and most belong to one of several distinct structural folds summarized in this section (Table 17. 1.17). The A chains of ricin and abrin as well as the single-chain toxins gelonin, α-momorcharin, α-trichosanthin, and shiga toxin are members of the ribosome-inactivating protein (RIP) fold family, named for their ability to block protein synthesis. Figure 17.1.39D illustrates the structure of the ricin A chain (Katzin et al., 1991) . It contains mixed β-sheets and several α-helices. The B chain of ricin and abrin each form a β-trefoil type structure (see β-Trefoils and Table 17 .1.9). There are two domains of such trefoils in the B chain of each toxin (Rutenber and Robertus, 1991) . Diphtheria toxin (DT), Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A (ETA), cholera toxin, heat-labile enterotoxin, and pertussis toxin all contain ADP ribosylation domains which enable these toxins to inhibit protein synthesis by catalyzing the ADP-ribosylation (and thereby the inactivation) of essential cellular proteins. The basic fold of an ADP ribosylation domain, shown in Fig. 17.1.39A , consists of a mixed structure of seven or eight β-strands and several short helices. The β-strands are grouped into two β-sheets that are packed against each other forming the core of this domain. Diphtheria toxin (DT) and Pseudomonas exotoxin A (ETA) structures are each organized into three domains: catalytic ADP ribosylation, transmembrane, and receptor-binding (Allured et al., 1986; Choe et al., 1992) . The sequential order of the three domains is from N-to C-terminal in DT and from C-to N-terminal in ETA. The transmembrane domain in both DT and ETA is all α-helical. The receptor-binding domains are both immunoglobulin-like; however, the receptor-binding domain of DT resembles an immunoglobulin V domain (see above) whereas that of ETA resembles a Con A lectin domain (see above). Cholera toxin, pertussis toxin, and heatlabile enterotoxin belong to a family of bacterial AB5 toxins. All of them contain an ADP ribosylation domain (domain A; see above) and a pentameric receptor-binding B domain (Sixma et al., 1991; Swaminathan et al., 1992; Stein et al., 1994) . The topology of the B domain, shown in Fig. 17.1.39B , contains a pentameric ring structure of layered helices-sheetshelices. The pentameric repeat unit is an α/β/α sandwich that consists of a one-turn α-helix, six-stranded antiparallel β-sheet and long α-helix. The three-dimensional structures of staphylococcal enterotoxins A (SEA), B (SEB), C2 (SEC2), and a toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1) define a family of toxins that function as superantigens to T cells (Swaminathan et al., 1992 (Swaminathan et al., , 1995 Prasad et al., 1993) . The common fold of these toxins is a two-domain structure (Fig. 17.1.39C) . The N-terminal domain folds with a Greek key topology and consists primarily of a five-stranded β barrel with strands in the order 1-2-3-5-4. It is also a member of the oligonucleotide/oligosaccaride binding (OB) fold (see The OB Fold; Murzin, 1993) . The C-terminal domain of these toxins folds into a modified β-grasp motif. The primary feature of this domain is a long α-helix packed against a five-stranded mixed β-sheet. Members of scorpion toxins are usually small proteins of ∼50 amino acids strengthened by disulfide bonds. They include scorpion margatoxin, noxiustoxin, charybdotoxin, scyllatoxin, agitoxin, chlorootoxin, toxin I5a, kaliotoxin, and others. The basic topology consists of a N-terminal α-helix packed against a threestranded antiparallel β-sheet (Fig. 17.1.39E ; Johnson et al., 1994) . The fold is stabilized by three sets of disulfide bonds connected in the sequential order of Cys I-IV, II-V, and III-VI. Cys II and III usually follow the CxxxC pattern whereas Cys V and VI usually follow the CxC pattern. Some members of the family, referred to as long-chain scorpion toxins, have an additional loop structure at the C-terminal end and an additional disulfide bond (Housset et al., 1994) . The rest of the family is known as the short-chain scorpion toxins. Most snake toxins have similar structures, known as the snake-toxin fold. Members with known structures include sea snake erabutoxin A and B, neurotoxin I and II, cobratoxin I and Supplement 35 Current Protocols in Protein Science Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds II, cardiotoxin I, II, IIB, III and V, and bungarotoxin. Their structure has two antiparallel βsheets, an N-terminal two-stranded β-sheet, and a C-terminal three-stranded β-sheet (Fig. 17.1.39F; Tsernoglou et al., 1978) . There are four disulfides with the sequential bonding of Cys I-III, II-IV, V-VI, and VII-VIII in each structure. The family of spider toxins include ω-conotoxins from sea snail and agatoxins from web spider. These are very small proteins, <40 residues in sequence, and are stabilized by Cys bridges. The structure consists of largely irregular loops with only two short β-strands forming an antiparallel β-sheet at the center of the fold (Fig. 17.1.39G ; Reily et al., 1995) . The three common disulfides are connected with the sequence order of Cys I-IV, II-V, and III-VI. Members of agatoxins have one more disulfide near the C-terminal end. Anthrax toxin is the major virulent factor of Bacillus anthracis. Owing to its high mortality when the infection is untreated, and its ability to exist in an aerosol form, it poses a threat to public health as a potential reagent for biological warfare and terrorism. The toxin consists of three proteins, lethal factor (LF),edema factor (EF), and protective antigen (PA). Among them, the lethal factor appears to be a protease that targets the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKK) family of proteins.edema factor is an adenylate cyclase and PA forms a membrane pore-like transporter once activated by furin-like cellular proteases. The crystal structures of all three factors have been solved (Table 17. 1.17; Petosa et al., 1997; Pannifer et al., 2001; Drum et al., 2002; Shen et al., 2002) . Lethal factor (LF), with a molecular weight of 90 kDa, consists of four domains. Domains I and IV are structurally similar, each with a set of nine to twelve helices packed against a fourstranded β-sheet (Fig. 17.1.40A ). The function of domain I appears to be to bind protective antigen (PA; see below) whereas domain IV appears to be the catalytic domain of LF. The α/β part of domain IV loosely resembles a thermolysin-like zincin (see Protease Folds) with a Zn 2+ coordinated within a His-Glu-X2-His motif. Domain I has no zinc-binding site. Domain II has an α/β fold similar to ADP ribosylation toxins (see ADP Ribosylation Toxins), however, a critical Glu is not conserved, suggesting this domain does not have ADP-ribosylating activity (Pannifer et al., 2001) . Domain III is a small α-helical bundle. The N-terminal peptide of MAPKK is bound at the interface between domains III and IV. Oedema factor (EF) is a calmodulin (CaM)dependent adenylate cyclase, whose activity increases 1000-fold upon activation by CaM. The structures of both the catalytic portion of EF alone and EF in complex with CaM have been determined (Drum et al., 2002; Shen et al., 2002) . The fold of EF consists of a largely α-helical domain, three switch regions, and two α/β catalytic domains, C A and C B (Fig.  17.1.40B ). Domains C A and C B have folds similar to the palm domains of DNA polymerase β and RNA poly(A) polymerase (see DNA Polymerases and Small RNA Polymerases). The binding of CaM induces large conformational changes in the association of the helical domain with respect to the switch and catalytic domains (Fig. 17.1.40C ). Protective antigen (PA), an 83-kDa protein, consists of four domains, I to IV (Fig.  17.1.40D) . Domain I contains a jelly-roll-like β-sandwich and two calcium ions coordinated by residues in an EF-hand motif. Domain I has the furin cleavage site and, once cleaved, PA forms a heptameric membrane pore transporter. Domain II folds into a modified Greek-key-like β-barrel. Domain III adopts the same topology as ferredoxins and the domain A of the toxicshock-syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1). Domain IV contains an immunoglobulin-like fold (see above) and is presumably responsible for host cell binding of PA. There are numerous different protein folds involved in binding to lipids or lipid-like molecules, most with β-sheet structures. Three well known families of lipid-binding proteins are discussed in this section: lipocalins, fatty acidbinding proteins, and serum albumins. See Modular Domains Involved in Signal Transduction for a discussion of other phospholipid-binding proteins. Lipocalins (or retinol-binding protein-like proteins) comprise a family of mostly extracel-Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology lular proteins 160 to 180 residues in length, typically involved in the transport of small hydrophobic molecules (Flower et al., 2000) . Examples include retinol-binding protein, βlactoglobulin, bilin-binding protein, and ordorant-binding protein (Table 17. 1.18). The crystal structure of retinol binding protein (Cowan et al., 1990) and subsequent structures reveals an eight-stranded antiparallel β-barrel with a β-meander topology (Fig. 17.1.41A ; also see Frequently Observed Secondary Strucutre Assemblies or Structural Motifs). A short helix is sometimes located before the first β-strand and after the last β-strand of the β-barrel. Ligands bind inside the barrel. Fatty acid binding proteins (FABPs) constitute a family of small, predominantly cytoplasmic lipid-binding proteins. They include myelin P2 protein, adipocytes lipid-binding protein, cellular retinol-binding protein (CRBP), and numerous tissue-specific forms of FABP. The fold comprises a ten-stranded antiparallel βsheet with a pair of α-helices between the first and second β-strands. Like lipocalins, the topology is that of a β-meander. The β-sheet folds in half to form what is often referred to as a β-clam (Fig 17.1.41B ). In the resulting structure the β-strands in each half of the clam shell are nearly orthogonal to each other and a ligand-binding cavity is created between them. Serum albumin is a remarkably abundant fatty acid transport protein in the circulatory system. In humans, concentrations of 40 to 50 mg/ml are maintained in the blood. Despite extensive characterization, the atomic three-dimensional structure of serum albumin remained elusive until the early 1990s. Crystal structures of human and horse forms reveal a mostly helical heart-shaped protein composed of three structurally homologous domains (I to III; Fig. 17.1.41C ; He and Carter, 1992; Ho et al., 1993; Curry et al., 1998; Sugio et al., 1999) . Each domain has ten helices and is divided into two subdomains (a and b) with six and four helices, respectively. Furthermore, the first four helices in subdomain a are structurally homologous to the four helices in subdomain b. It is noteworthy that serum albumin contains 35 cysteine residues resulting in 17 disulfide bridges and one free cysteine. Despite the striking symmetry within the structure of serum albumin, its five fatty acid binding sites are located asymmetrically around the molecule (Curry et al., 1998) : domain I has two binding sites, domain II has one binding site (shared with domain I), and β domain III has three binding sites (Fig. 17.1.41C ). Chaperonins are a class of proteins that assist in catalyzing the folding of other proteins. The GroEL/GroES complex represents one of the best characterized chaperonin systems and both components are required for proper protein folding in bacteria (Xu et al., 1997b) . Crystal structures of GroEL, GroES, an asymmetric GroEL/GroES complex, and other homologous chaperonin complexes have been determined by several groups (Table 17. 1.19) . GroEL (L for large) forms the cylindrical core of the GroEL/GroES complex and consists of fourteen identical subunits arranged as two heptameric rings stacked back to back (Fig  17.1.42A ). Each individual protomer is comprised of three distinct domains: equatorial, intermediate, and apical (Fig 17.1.42B and C) . The equatorial domain consists primarily of six long α-helices, two short helices, and three pairs of short β-strands. This is also the ATPase domain of GroEL. The intermediate domain contains a three-stranded β-sheet and three αhelices. The apical domain consists of a mixture of five α-helices and a seven-stranded β-sandwich. Structurally, the equatorial domain provides most of the intersubunit contacts within each heptameric ring and all the contacts between the two back-to-back stacked heptameric rings. The intermediate domain appears to bridge between the equatorial and the apical domains. Most of the contacts between GroEL and GroES are mediated through the apical domain. GroES (S for small; also known as chaperonin-10) is a single ring of seven identical subunits that forms a dome over one end of the GroEL cylinder (Fig 17.1.42A ). Each individual subunit folds into a five-stranded antiparallel β-barrel with four more associated βstrands and a long mobile loop (Fig. 17.1.42D ). The end of the barrel near the long loop interacts with the GroEL subunits. In the GroEL complex alone, both heptameric rings are essentially identical; however, when complexed with GroES and ADP at one end, the cis ring (i.e., the one closest to GroES and bound to ADP) of GroEL has dramatically Fig. 17.1.42B,C) . During the cycles of protein folding, the GroEL/GroES complex is proposed to undergo significant conformational changes, including the dissociation and reassociation of the GroES cap (Keskin et al., 2002) . The crystal structure of myosin subfragment-1 (Table 17. 1.19) illustrates the overall arrangement of myosin heavy chain, regulatory light chain, and essential light chain (Houdusse et al., 1999; Rayment et al., 1993) . The heavy chain forms much of the myosin head as well as an ∼85-Å-long coiled-coil α-helix ( Fig.  17.1.42E ). The myosin head consists of mostly α-helices with the actin-binding site located near the tip. Both the regulatory and essential light chain subunits bind to the long coiled-coil helical tail of the heavy chain. The structure of the regulatory light chain resembles that of calmodulin with a divalent cation binding site in its first EF-hand region (see above). The essential light chain consists mostly helical elements that wrap around the heavy chain helical tail. Ras and RasGAP. As a prototype of small G proteins, the structure of p21Ras ) reveals a variation of the mononucleotide binding fold (Fig. 17 -Binding Fold) . Like many small G proteins, the intrinsic GTPase activity of Ras is quite low and requires GTPase activation protein (GAP) to increase the enzymatic rate of GTP hydrolysis. The structure of p120GAP is all α-helical (Fig. 17.1.43B; Scheffzek et al., 1996) . The structure of a complex between Ras and the Ras guaninenucleotide-exchange-factor region of the son of sevenless (Sos) reveals a tight association between them that buries 3600 Å 2 of surface area. This results in the dissociation of the nucleotide from Ras due to alteration of the conformation of the switch 1 and 2 regions (Boriack-Sjodin et al., 1998) . The Ras-exchange-factor region of Sos consists of N-and C-terminal α-helical domains, with the C-terminal α-helical domain interacting with Ras ( Fig. 17.1.43C ). Another group of Ras-like GTP-binding proteins is the Ran family that are involved in nuclear transport. The structure of Ran-GppNHp has also been determined (Vetter et al., 1999) . Rho and RhoGAP. The Rho family of small G proteins includes Rho, Rac, and Cdc42Hs. They regulate the phosphorylation rate of a variety of proteins involved in cell proliferation and cytoskeleton formation. The intrinsic GTPase activity of the Rho family of G proteins (i.e., the rate of hydrolysis of GTP to GDP) is slow but can be increased by 10 5 -fold upon interacting with Rho family of G protein activators. Several crystal structures of Rho family G proteins and their complexes with RhoGAPs have been determined, thus revealing the molecular mechanism of the activation of Rho by its activator proteins (Fig. 17.1.43D ). Among them, the structures of Rac1 (Hirshberg et al., 1997) and p50rhoGAP (Barrett et al., 1997) , as well as the complexes between RhoA and RhoGAP (Rittinger et al., 1997b) , Cdc42Hs and p50rhoGAP, and Rac1 and Tiam 1 have been published (Rittinger et al., 1997a; Worthylake et al., 2000; Table 17.1.19) . The structure of Rho assumes a typical Ras-like G protein fold and RhoGAP adopts an α-helical fold similar to the p120GAP. In the structure of the complexes, an Arg residue on RhoGAP interacts with the P-loop of Rho, presumably to stabilize the transition state of the GTP hydrolysis. Unlike the Ras-like small G-proteins, the family of large GTP-binding proteins is characterized by higher molecular weight and higher intrinsic GTPase activity. Members of this family include guanylate-binding proteins 1 and 2 (GBP1 and 2), Mx, and dynamin. The crystal structure of an intact human GBP1 with a molecular weight of 67,000 reveals a two-domain fold (Fig. 17.1.43E; Prakash et al., 2000) . The N-terminal domain resembles a modified Ras-like G-protein fold with several insertions compared to the canonical Ras structure. The C-terminal domain is elongated and consists of seven α-helices including one that is 118-Å long. GBP1 lacks the conserved nucleotide binding motif (Asn/Thr)-Lys-X-Glu as observed in all Ras-like G-proteins. GBP1 is stable without the bound nucleotide, whereas Ras is not. G protein trimer. G protein-coupled transmembrane receptor signaling cascades are ubiquitous throughout eukaryotic cells and util-Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology ize heterotrimeric G protein complexes. Crystal structures of two heterotrimeric G tα /i α GDP G tβγ complexes reveal the molecular architecture and provide mechanistic insight (Table  17. 1.19; Wall et al., 1995; Lambright et al., 1996) . The G tα subunit (Fig. 17. 1.43F and G) is organized into three structural components: (1) a Ras-like GTPase domain that contains a mononucleotide-binding fold (see The Classical Mononucleotide-Binding Fold), (2) an all α-helical domain with a central long helix surrounded by five shorter helices, and (3) an N-terminal helix that projects away from the remainder of the G tα . The G tβ subunit has an N-terminal helix followed by seven repeating WD motifs that are organized into a β-propeller structure (see Frequently Observed Secondary Structure Assemblies or Structural Motifs). Each WD-structural motif (also known as the Trp-Asp or WD40 motifs) consists of four antiparallel β-strands that form one propeller blade; however, the so-called WD repeat sequence corresponds to the three inner strands of a blade together with the outside (fourth) strand of the preceding blade. The G tγ subunit consists of two helices that pack against the β subunit. The RGS fold. Regulators of G-protein signaling (RGS) modulate the GTPase activity of heterotrimeric G proteins. Their function is analogous to the GAPs that activate the GTPase activity of Ras-like G proteins (see above). The mechanism of RGS modulation is proposed to be stabilization of the transition state of catalytic G α subunits, since RGS possesses no affinity for the G α -GDP complex, modest affinity for the G α -GTP state, and high affinity for the transition analog G α -GDP-AlF 4 − complex. The crystal structures for members of RGS include the structure of RGS4 in complex with G iα -GDP-AlF 4 − (Tesmer et al., 1997) , and the structure of the rgRGS domain of p115RhoGEF . The RGS domain consists of ∼130 amino acids that fold into an all α-helical structure with nine helices divided into two subdomains (Fig. 17.1.43H; Tesmer, 1997 ). The larger domain, comprised of helices α4 to α7, assumes a classical right-handed antiparallel four-helix bundle fold, while the small domain consists of helices α1 to α3, α8, and α9. Instead of binding to the catalytic residues of the GTPase domain, RGS4 interacts with the three switch regions of G iα , thereby stabilizing their conformation. The GoLoco motif. The nineteen-amino acid GoLoco motif regulates the function of heterotrimeric G proteins by binding to the GDP-bound form of the G α subunit, thereby preventing reassociation of G βγ with the GDPbound G α . By doing so, GoLoco enables a continued presence of G βγ which can interact with effector proteins without activating G α . This motif is present in RGS12, RGS14, LOCO, Purkinje-cell protein-2 (Pcp2), and Rap1GAP isoforms. The crystal structure of a G αi -GDP bound to the GoLoco region of RGS14 revealed key interactions between the GoLoco motif and the G αi1 subunit (Fig.  17.1.43I ; Kimple et al., 2002) . In particular, the conserved (N/E)QR triad of GoLoco interacts with the nucleotide binding pocket of G α to make direct contacts with the αand β-phosphates of GDP. The binding site of GoLoco on the G αi1 partially overlap with that of G βγ , thus preventing reassociation of the G protein heterotrimer. The F 1 F 0 ATPase found in the membranes of mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria is responsible for synthesizing ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate by utilizing a proton gradient that has been generated across the membrane. The large multisubunit ATPase complex is composed of an F 1 globular head catalytic domain linked by a central stalk to an integral membrane F 0 proton translocating domain. The F 1 domain, including the stalk, consists of five subunits with the stoichiometry α 3 β 3 γδε. The F 0 domain is composed of a, b, and c subunits with varying stoichiometry. Various species have additional F 0 subunits. Crystal structures of the F 1 domain and stalk regions from mitochondria, chloroplasts, and bacteria (Table 17 .1.19) reveal that the α and β subunits are arranged in an alternating fashion around a pseudosymmetric three-fold axis to make a structure shaped like a slightly squashed pear (Fig. 17.1.44A and B) . The α and β subunits are structurally very homologous even though there is marginal sequence identity (20%) between them. They each consist of three domains: an N-terminal six-stranded antiparallel β-barrel, a central nine-stranded mostly parallel β-sheet surrounded on both faces by nine helices, and a C-terminal six-to seven-helix bundle (Fig. 17.1.44B) . The central domain of both α and β subunits bind mononucleotides, although only the β subunit is catalytic. Both subunits have a P-loop with a conserved mononucleotide-binding sequence motif at the C-terminal end of the sheet. The γ, δ, and ε subunits fold together intimately to form an α/β foot located just below the α 3 β 3 complex, con- Current Protocols in Protein Science Overview of Protein Structural and Functional Folds nected to it by a long 90-Å α-helix from the γ subunit that runs roughly parallel to the F 1 pseudo-three-fold axis (Fig. 17.1.44B ; Gibbons et al., 2000) . The γ subunit comprises a Rossman-like fold (see The Classical Dinucleotide-Binding Fold) with a five-stranded mostly parallel β-sheet (strand order 3-2-1-4-5) surrounded by six helices. The long, curving C-terminal helix and shorter N-terminal helix of this fold form the stalk region. The eukaryotic δ subunit (bacterial ε subunit) is a ten-stranded β-sandwich followed by a pair of antiparallel helices that project away from one end of the sandwich. The 50-residue mitochondrial ε subunit comprising a helix-loop-helix structure apparently has no counterpart in chloroplast or bacterial ATP synthases (Gibbons et al., 2000) . The structure of the entire complex has been more elusive. A 3.9-Å resolution unrefined C α model of F 1 F 0 ATPase from yeast shows ten c subunits from the F 0 domain arranged in a circle (Stock et al., 1999) . Each c subunit is a pair of antiparallel helices 47-and 58-Å long, respectively. This results in two concentric rings of helices with their helical axes running approximately perpendicular to the plane of the circle (Fig. 17.1.44C ). The outer helices are kinked in the middle, giving the barrel a slight hourglass appearance. The proteasome is the central nonlysosomal protein degradation enzyme observed in archeabacterium and eukaryotes. In most prokaryotes, a simpler proteasome homolog such as the ATP-dependent protease Hs1V plays a similar role. In addition to a host of cellular functions, including the degradation of abnormal or misfolded proteins, and the removal of various transient regulatory proteins, the proteasome also plays a major role in generating antigenic peptides for presentation by MHC class I molecules in mammals. The proteasome is composed of a 20S core proteolytic chamber and a 11S or 19S regulatory particle at the ends of the chamber. The crystal structures of archeabacterium Thermoplasma acidophilum (Lowe et al., 1995) , yeast , and bovine (Unno et al., 2002) 20S proteasomes reveal structures consisting of four heptameric rings, α 7 β 7 β 7 α 7 , stacked on top of each other to form a barrel-shaped complex with an approximate length of 150 Å and a diameter of 110 Å (Fig.  17.1.45, red and green regions) . The α and β subunits share the same fold (known as the Ntn hydrolase fold; see Ntn Hydrolase Fold, consisting of a central β-sandwich flanked by two α-helices on one side, and two or three on the other (Fig. 17.1.35H ). The eukaryotic forms consist of seven distinct types of β-subunits and seven distinct α-subunits, whereas the archael proteasome has one type of αand one type of β-subunit. Only three of the eukaryotic βsubunits (β1, β2, and β5) are fully post-translationally processed to form mature catalytic domains with an N-terminal threonine nucleophile. None of the α-subunits are catalytic. Jawed vertebrates express an additional set of three catalytic β-subunits (β1i, β2i, and β5i) that are incorporated into the immunoproteasome that is responsible for generating MHC ligands for antigen presentation (Unno et al., 2002) . The Escherichia coli ATP-dependent protease HslVU forms a dimer of two hexamers . The single HslV subunit is homologous to the β-subunit of proteasomes and has an N-terminal threonine nucleophile. Crystal structures of the 11S regulator alone (human Regα) and in complex with the 20S proteasome (T. brucei 11S and yeast 20S) reveal a barrel-shaped heptamer with outer dimensions of ∼90 Å in diameter and 70 Å in length (Knowlton et al., 1997; Whitby et al., 2000) . Each monomer is a bundle of four long α-helices. This barrel is situated at both ends of the 20S particle essentially extending the proteasome cylinder (Fig 17.1.45 ). The inner diameter is 33 Å at the proteasome-binding end and 24 Å at the opposite end. The capsid proteins of a virus provide a protective shell around the enclosed RNA or DNA. These viral coats are made from an assembly of identical or nearly identical small protein subunits. The protein capsids of all known spherical viruses are built using icosahedral symmetry. In its simplest form, an icosahedron is a 20-sided polygon with two-, three-, and five-fold symmetry, made from an arrangement of identical equilateral triangles (Fig.  17.1.46A ). Because constructing a protein subunit with equilateral three-fold symmetry is difficult, the simplest known viruses contain three asymmetric subunits per triangle or 60 subunits per virus. Larger and more complex viral coats can be made by further subdividing these asymmetric units and using more protein subunits, all the while maintaining icosahedral symmetry. Viruses can be classified by their triangulation (T) number which indicates the Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology number of capsid subunits in multiples of 60. For example, a T = 1 virus has 60 subunits and a T = 3 virus has 3 × 60 = 180 subunits. The three-dimensional structures of numerous capsid proteins for spherical viruses that infect bacteria, plants, insects, and animals have revealed a common fold for most of these structures, namely an eight-stranded jelly-roll β sandwich (see Elements of Protein Structure). Strands 1-8-3-6 form one sheet and strands 2-7-4-5 form the other sheet of the β sandwich ( Fig. 17.1.46B) . Despite the lack of sequence homology between various classes of viral-coat proteins, the jelly-roll β sandwich topology is well conserved in >50 known capsid structures according to SCOP classification of the PDB . It forms a wedge-shaped β sandwich, generally with short loops at one end and longer loops at the other. A striking exception to this fold is observed in the coat protein of bacteriophage MS2, which is a T = 3 virus (see MS2 Phage Coat Protein). High-resolution structural information is available for only ∼50 integral membrane proteins (Table 17 .1.20), compared with over 10,000 soluble proteins, although an estimated 15% to 30% of genes encode membrane proteins. Difficulties in protein expression, solubilization, and the growth of well-ordered crystals have plagued structural studies. Nonetheless, remarkable progress has been made in solving structures of integral membrane proteins owing to advances in overexpression, availability of detergents, and the use of antibody fragments in crystallization. Complementary methodological approaches, including Xray diffraction, cryo-electron microscopy, NMR spectroscopy, and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy promise even faster future progress. Updated compendiums of structures of membrane proteins can be found at http: //blanco.biomol.uci.edu/Membrane_ Proteins_xtal.html and http://www. mpibpfrankfurt.mpg.de/michel/public/memprotstru ct.html. The diversity of integral membrane protein folds appears to be much less than soluble proteins (Schulz, 2002) . Due to the thermodynamic cost of burying charges in the hydrophobic environment of the membrane, integral membrane structures must minimize exposed charges and unsatisfied hydrogen bonds. Two classes of structures are observed satisfying these requirements: the α-helix and the closed β-barrel. The α-helical structures are most prevalent and are found in cytoplasmic membrane proteins. They include both transmembrane α-helices and α-helical structures in monotopic integral membrane proteins which do not cross the bilayer. β-barrel structures are characteristic of proteins of the outer membranes of Gram-negative bacteria. The first high-resolution structure determination of an integral membrane protein was a photosynthetic reaction center from the purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas virdis, for which Johann Deisenhofer, Robert Huber, and Hartmut Michel were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1988 (Deisenhofer et al., 1984 Deisenhofer and Michel, 1989) . This large complex includes four protein subunits and fourteen cofactors. The transmembrane core of the complex has pseudo two-fold symmetry, formed by the structurally related chains L and M; each of which contains five membrane-spanning α-helices. The chlorophyll, quinone, carotenoid, and nonheme iron cofactors associate with the L and M subunits. The H subunit forms an additional transmembrane α-helix and also contains β structures on the cytoplasmic face. The eleventransmembrane helices are arranged approximately parallel to each other ( Fig. 17.1.47A) . The cytochrome subunit, bound to four heme groups, is on the periplasmic face and does not span the membrane. More recently, additional photosynthetic complexes have been solved, including the reaction center of Rhodobacter sphaeroides, the two photosystems of chloroplasts, and antenna light-harvesting complexes (Axelrod et al., 2002; Chirino et al., 1994; Jordan et al., 2001; Koepke et al., 1996; Prince et al., 1997; Zouni et al., 2001) . A number of families of integral membrane proteins contain seven membrane-spanning αhelices. Among them, the microbial rhodopsins are the best studied. The crystallographic studies of bacteriorhodopsin from Halobacterium salinarum have provided insight into the mechanism of this light-driven proton pump (Lanyi, 1999; Subramaniam, 1999) . The helices pack around a covalently linked retinal chromophore, forming an internal channel lined by hydrophilic residues (Fig. 17.1.47B 2000) . More recently, structures of two related haloarchaeon proteins, halorhodopsin (Kolbe et al., 2000) and sensory rhodopsin II (Luecke et al., 2001; Royant et al., 2001; Gordeliy et al., 2002) , have also been determined. The versatility of the seven transmembrane helix bundle is apparent. For example, bacteriorhodopsin and halorhodopsin are ion transporters, while sensory rhodopsin participates in photosensory signaling and interacts with transducer proteins. Structural differences, particularly in the retinal binding pocket and conformation of bound retinal, reflect the distinct functional role of sensory rhodopsin (Luecke et al., 2001; Royant et al., 2001) . In higher organisms, the seven-helix fold is seen in receptors coupled to G proteins, a large family of integral membrane proteins. The crystal structure of the mammalian retinal photoreceptor rhodopsin represents the first highresolution structure of a G protein-coupled receptor (Palczewski et al., 2000) . Although the overall topology of the seven-helix bundle of bovine rhodopsin resembles that of microbial rhodopsins, its structure appears unique. Unlike the parallel arrangement of the helices in bacteriorhodopsin, some of the bovine rhodopsin helices are tilted or strongly bent at proline residues ( Fig. 17.1.47C) . Moreover, bovine rhodopsin contains more extensive secondary structures in the intra-and extracellular regions, consistent with the disparate receptor function. There is also an additional short helix that lies parallel to the membrane surface on the cytoplasmic face. This amphipathic eighth helix is of particular interest because of its location in the G protein binding region. On the extracellular face, the three loops associate with portions of the N-terminus to form a compact structure centered around two twisted β hairpins. The second extracellular loop, which contains the inner hairpin, is linked through a conserved disulfide bond to transmembrane helix 3, and forms a plug covering the chromophore binding pocket (Bourne and Meng, 2000) . Ion channels allow movement of selected ions along electrochemical gradients, and can open and close (i.e., gate) in response to various stimuli. A successful approach to their structural study has involved use of bacterial homologs. Two bacterial potassium channel structures have been determined: the KcsA H +gated channel and the Ca 2+ -gated MthK channel (Doyle et al., 1998; Jiang et al., 2002a,b) . The bacterial mechanosensitive channels MscL and MscS, which respond to mechanical stretching of the cell membrane, have also been solved (Bass et al., 2002; Chang et al., 1998) . Structures of two ClC chloride channels were recently determined from E. coli and Salmonella typhimurium (Dutzler et al., 2002) . The ClC chloride channel is dimeric, with each subunit forming its own pore to make up a double-barreled structure, as predicted by biophysical studies (Fig. 17.1.47D) . The secondary structure is all α-helical, with each subunit containing seventeen membrane-inserted αhelices. Many of the membrane-inserted helices are tilted relative to the plane of the membrane, and not all pass entirely through the bilayer. The crystal structure revealed an internal structural repeat, wherein the N-terminal portion of each subunit is structurally related to the C-terminal portion. This unanticipated internal symmetry results in an antiparallel arrangement of the subunit halves. A selectivity filter is formed by helix dipoles and main chain atoms that interact with bound Cl − . The partial positive charge generated by the helix dipoles likely supports electrostatic stabilization of Cl − but does not result in tight binding (and thus does not restrict Cl − movement through the pore). The carboxylate of a conserved glutamic acid near the chloride-binding site protrudes into the pore, suggesting a gating function to open and close the channel through electrostatic repulsion. The large family of ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporters are involved in ATP-driven import and export of a variety of substrates. The functional transporters contain two transmembrane domains and two cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding domains. The structures of MsbA lipid transporter (flippase) and BtuCD vitamin B 12 transporter are two members of this family solved to date (Chang and Roth, 2001; Locher et al., 2002) . The membrane-spanning portion of the E. coli BtuCD transporter, made up of two BtuC subunits, has a total of 20 transmembrane α-helices that display a complex packing arrangement (Fig. 17.1.47E ). The translocation channel seems to be located at the BtuC dimer interface. The two BtuD cassettes interact with each other and are attached to the BtuC module on the cytoplasmic face. A large, water-filled vestibule located in the cytoplasm between the four subunits may allow vitamin B 12 to exit the transporter; two cytoplasmic loops of BtuC appear to serve as the channel gate. Comparison Current Protocols in Protein Science Supplement 35 Structural Biology of BtuCD with MsbA shows that the arrangement and packing of the transmembrane domains differ significantly. While in BtuCD, both the cytoplasmic and the transmembrane domains of each subunit remain in close contact, in MsbA they are oriented away from each other. The structure of a calcium ATPase from skeletal-muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum has been determined in both E1 (Ca 2+ -bound) and E2 (Ca 2+ -free) states, providing details of the mechanism of this P-type ATPase (Toyoshima et al., 2000; Toyoshima and Nomura, 2002) . The Ca 2+ ATPase has ten transmembrane αhelices and three cytoplasmic domains. Two calcium ions are bound at the center of four transmembrane helices in the E1 state, and two of these helices are in unwound conformations to efficiently coordinate the ions. Four transmembrane helices, one of which is 41-residues long, appear to extend through the bilayer into the cytoplasm, forming a stalk region that connects the transmembrane portion to the cytoplasmic domains. The crystal structure of the E2 state revealed that large movements of the cytoplasmic domains and rearrangements of the transmembrane helices take place during the reaction cycle ( Fig. 17.1.47F ; Toyoshima and Nomura, 2002) . The structure of E. coli efflux transporter AcrB, a major multidrug exporter which cooperates with the β-barrel membrane protein TolC (see below), was recently determined by X-ray crystallography (Murakami et al., 2002b) . The first structure of a mammalian channel protein was that of a bovine aquaporin water channel, AQP1, which was studied by electron crystallography, electron microscopy, and X-ray crystallography (Murata et al., 2000; Ren et al., 2001; Sui et al., 2001) . AQP1 shares the same overall topology as its bacterial homolog GlpF, a glycerol channel (Fu et al., 2000) . AQP1 contains a quadruple-barreled channel, with individual pores formed by each of its four subunits. Each monomer has six transmembrane and two membrane-inserted α-helices ( Fig. 17.1.47G ). Severe tilting of the transmembrane helices relative to the membrane normal, as was seen in the ClC chloride channel, allows for formation of the dumbbell-shaped pore in AQP1. The structure of the pore reveals that water selectivity is based on a narrow constric-tion region that imposes a 2.8-Å diameter steric limit on the channel. Several structures of respiratory enzymes have been solved, including both bacterial and mammalian cytochrome c oxidase (Iwata et al., 1995; Tsukihara et al., 1996; Ostermeier et al., 1997; Soulimane et al., 2000) , fumarate reductase (Iverson et al., 1999; Lancaster et al., 1999) , and formate reductase-N (Jormakka et al., 2002) . Crystal structures of the bovine and chicken cytochrome bc 1 complex (complex III) as well as its Saccharomyces cerevisiae homolog provide intriguing insights into the function of the respiratory chain (Xia et al., 1997; Iwata et al., 1998; Hunte et al., 2000) . The complex functions as a dimer of multisubunit monomers. In the mammalian bc 1 complex, seven of the eleven subunits have membrane-spanning components, forming a total of 26 transmembrane helices in the dimer (Fig. 17.1.47H) . Conformations of the Rieske iron-sulfur protein in different crystal forms have led to the suggestion that the soluble portion of the subunit may move during catalysis to facilitate the transfer of electrons from ubiquinol to cytochrome c 1 (Iwata et al., 1998; . A distinct class of membrane proteins contain membrane-spanning β-strands arranged into closed barrels. Transmembrane β-barrel structures are composed of 8 to 22 antiparallel strands (Schulz, 2002) . This class is best illustrated by porins, which are channels of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria ( Fig.  17.1.1K ). Related to the porins are the iron transporters FepA and FhuA, which form 22stranded barrels housing globular plug domains (Fig. 17.1.47I ; Buchanan et al., 1999; Ferguson et al., 2002) . Both porins and maltoporins appear as trimers with each subunit forming one β-barrel channel. A more unusual structure is TolC, an E. coli outer membrane protein involved in export of a range of molecules. Three protein subunits each contribute a fourstranded β sheets to form a single twelvestranded outer membrane-spanning β-barrel ( Fig. 17.1.47J ). In addition, TolC also has a large, left-handed α-helical barrel stabilized by coiled-coil interactions. The α-helical barrel is contiguous with the β-barrel domain, and extends 100 Å into the periplasm. This results in the formation of a 140-Å long channel-tunnel that spans both the outer membrane and the Dessen, A., Gupta, D., Sabesan, S., Brewer, C.F., and Sacchettini, J.C. 1995. X-ray crystal structure of the soybean agglutinin cross-linked with a biantennary analog of the blood group I carbohydrate antigen. The classical dinucleotide-and mononucleotide-binding folds shown by ribbon drawings and topology diagrams. In the topology diagrams, the β-sheets are viewed from the C-terminal edge with β-strands represented by green triangles and α-helices by red circles. Numbers indicate strand and helix order within the structure. Circles containing an "X" represent possible domain insertions. Bound nucleotides are colored purple. (A) Ribbon drawing of the NAD-binding domain of dogfish lactate dehydrogenase with bound NAD represented as a ball-and-stick model (PDB entry 1ldm). (B) Topology diagram for the common core of the classical dinucleotide-binding fold. (C) Ribbon drawing of adenylate kinase as an example of a mononucleotide-binding protein (PDB entry 1aky). The portion of the structure that is not part of the nucleotide-binding fold is colored purple. The bound inhibitor bis(adenosine)-5′-pentaphosphate (AP5) is shown using a ball-and-stick model. 1hmi) . The p66 subunit is colored by subdomain and the p51 subunit is dark blue. The bound DNA is represented by a yellow and purple phosphate backbone trace. (F) Thermus thermophilus RNA polymerase holoenzyme (PDB entry 1iw7). The β′, β, α′, α′′, ω, and σ 70 subunits are labeled and colored green, cyan, red, tan, magenta, and dark blue, respectively. (G) The N-terminal domain of the RNAP α subunit from E. coli (PDB entry 1bdf). (H) RNAP II from yeast (PDB entry 1i50). Visible subunits are labeled and the five subunits in common with bacterial RNAP follow the same coloring scheme as in (F). The receptor is shown with the C-terminal (cytoplasmic) domain at the top, and the N-terminal (extracellular) domain at the bottom of the diagram. The covalently linked eleven-cis-retinal ligand is shown as a blue ball-and-stick model. The additional eighth helix is colored in yellow. (D) The ClC chloride channel from Salmonella typhimurium (PDB entry 1kpl). The double barrel of the homodimer is shown with Cl − ions, visible in the pores, displayed as green spheres. View is perpendicular to the plane of the membrane with the two subunits colored red and blue. (E) The E. coli vitamin B12 transporter BtuCD. The dimer is depicted, with BtuC subunits in red and BtuD subunits in blue (PDB entry 1l7v). (F) Calcium ATPase from skeletal-muscle sarcoplasmic reticulum in the E1 state with bound calcium ions displayed as orange spheres. The three cytoplasmic domains are at the top (PDB entry 1eul). (G) Bovine AQP1 water channel monomer (PDB entry 1j4n). View is from the plane of the membrane with the extracellular face at the top. The two membrane-inserted helices that do not span the membrane are colored in blue. (H) Bovine cytochrome bc1complex (PDB entry 1bgy). The subunits with membrane-spanning portions are colored in the following scheme. Cytochrome b is red, cytochrome c1 is aqua, Rieske iron-sulfur protein is blue, subunit 7 is orange, subunit 10 is green, and subunit 11 is yellow.  
