ec2c1e7f105f92eff1e0377a01c0859ec0862e7c
Poster Session Group I -Blue TPS 1 -Allergic immune responses 461 Genetically restricted local IgE repertoires from nasal tissue of allergic donors target multiple epitopes on Bet v 1
  Levin ;  Davies ;  Liljekvist M   ;  Carlsson F   ;  Gould ;  Sutton ;  Ohlin 

Lund University King's College London Lund University Lund University King's College London King's College London Lund University 
Background: Chitin is a potent adjuvant in immune responses of Th1, Th2, and Th17. In our previous study, tumor necrosis factoralpha (TNF-a) is a key mediator in the development of T cell response to inhaled allergens through TNF receptor on NKT cells. Objective: We investigated the role of NKT cell in Th1, Th2, and Th17 immune response induced by intranasally administered chitin. Methods: Six week-old wild-type or CD1ddeficient mice were intranasally sensitised with 75 lg of OVA plus 100 lg of HDMderived chitin on day 0, 1, 2, and 7. After Background: Antibodies of the IgE isotype and their recognition of allergens at the initiation of allergic response are crucial components of allergic reactions, with influence on the severity of the disease. Despite this, detailed information on the molecular nature of IgE-allergen interactions is still lacking for most important allergens. Method: IgE-derived antibody fragments specific for the major birch pollen allergen Bet v 1 were isolated from combinatorial libraries derived from the IgE-repertoires of nasal tissue of allergic donors. Their interactions with Bet v 1 were characterised using immunological assays. The structure of one of the IgE in single chain fragment variable (scFv) format was solved using X-ray crystallography. Results: We isolated four novel Bet v 1-specific IgE-derived antibody fragments with genetic origin in the IGHV5 germline gene, suggested to be overrepresented in some IgE repertoires. We show that that such antibodies, despite their limited diversity, are able to fulfill the basic criteria for FceRI cross-linkage by targeting two nonoverlapping epitopes. These previously undescribed IgE-reactive epitopes were further defined and a molecular basis for differential recognition of Bet v 1 isoforms and homologous allergens of the PR-10 family was identified by pinpointing important single amino acid residues within one of the epitopes. Further, we present the first highresolution structure of a human allergenspecific IgE in the scFv format, a structure that demonstrates that a human allergenspecific antigen binding site may display a protruding CDRH3. Conclusion: We here demonstrate the potential of local IgE repertoires with limited diversity in their genetic origin to fulfill the basic criteria for initiation of allergic responses. Further, the non-planar epitope targeted by MO418 and its protruding CDRH3 contrasts previous findings, suggesting IgE to favour planar epitopes, calling for further investigations of the nature of such epitopes. Papain impairs the epidermal barrier and independent of its enzymatic activityexhibits strong allergenic potential via the skin Background: The cysteine protease papain from the peptidase C1 family is commonly used in food, pharmaceutical, textile and cosmetic industries although it is known to induce allergic reactions like occupational asthma. In a previous percutaneous sensitisation mouse model, we demonstrated that the papain-like house dust mite allergen Der p 1 induces allergic skin reactions and elicits specific T H 2-biased antibody titers. Moreover, recent studies have demonstrated deleterious effects of papain on the airway epithelium. In this study, we aimed to investigate the immediate consequences of topically applied papain and the sensitisation potential of repeated epicutaneous treatment with papain in in-vivo models. Methods: We tested the immediate effects of papain on the skin barrier of WT C57Bl/6 mice and its effects on tight junction proteins in-vitro in differentiated human primary keratinocytes. Using C57BL/6 WT and TLR4-deficient mice, we analyzed the sensitisation potential of papain after repeated epicutaneous applica-tion and recruitment of immune cells after re-challenge. Results: Our results indicate a strong impairment of the skin barrier by papain measured by an increase of transepidermal water loss and an increase of vascular permeability after application. Degradation of the tight junction proteins ZO-1, claudin-4 and occludin was observed already after 30 min. Repeated epicutaneous application of papain induced an inflammatory response by recruiting neutrophils, mast cells and CD3-positive cells and by induction of a T H 2-biased antibody response. The potential of papain to induce specific sensitisation via the skin was independent of functional TLR4 expression and, in spite of its capacity to degrade epidermal tight junction proteins, did not rely on its enzymatic function. Conclusion: Our data suggest that papain has strong allergenic potential via the skin, even when not being enzymatically active. 463 Chitin stimulates adaptive T cell response to inhalant allergens through natural killer T (NKT) cell sensitisation, 50 lg of OVA was challenged intranasally on day 14, 15, 21 and 22, and 24 h after last OVA challenge, mice were sacrificed for evaluation. Results: HDM-derived chitin induced airway inflammation and increased the expression of all cytokines of Th1, Th2, and Th17 as well as the serum level of OVA-specific IgE, IgG1, and IgG2a. In the absence of CD1d, the expression of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cytokines and the serum level of OVA-specific IgE and IgG1 were alleviated, while the expression of Treg cytokines and the serum level of OVA-specific IgG2a were more enhanced. Conclusion: NKT cell has a key role in the development of Th1, Th2, and Th17 response to inhaled allergens induced by intranasally administered chitin. 464 Site-specific protection against cinnamaldehyde depends on its haptenous state in a mouse model of fragrance allergy Background: Cinnamon aldehyde (CA) represents an ubiquitous fragrance that may lead to type I and IV hypersensitivity via the skin or mucosal surfaces (lung, gut) . Here, we investigated whether the encounter of CA as a hapten or coupled to a carrier influences whether the organism responds allergic or tolerant. Methods: Cinnamaldehyde (CA) alone, or conjugated with keyhole limpet hemocyanin (CA-KLH) was applied nasally to mice six times on two consecutive days in biweekly intervals. Subsequently, ears were painted with cinnamaldehyde and ear swelling measured after 24 and 48 h. Mice were also challenged by oral gavage of 2 mg CA and body temperature was measured for 30 min. Cytokine profile of stimulated splenocytes as well as CA-specific antibodies and corticosterone levels were assessed by ELISA and EIA. Results: Only in mice sensitised with CA-KLH a specific immune response with CAspecific IgG1, IgE, IgG2a and IgA levels as well as elevated IFNc could be observed. CA-KLH sensitised mice also showed a sig-nificant ear swelling response to CA after 24 h. However, CA-KLH mice were protected from anaphylaxis upon oral challenge. In contrast, although no specific antibody and cytokine response could be detected in mice sensitised with the hapten CA alone, 40% reacted upon oral challenge with CA by an anaphylactic decrease in body temperature and physical activity. In contrast, they were unresponsive upon epicutaneous challenge with CA. Interestingly, corticosterone levels of CA-sensitised mice did not differ between the time points. Conclusions: We conclude that fragrances may via the nasal route indeed lead to specific type I hypersensitivity, but that the type and extent of response is critically determined by their antigenic statehapten or complete antigen. Background: Dual H 3 /H 4 antagonists modulate IgE production both in atopic and non-atopic diseases via H 3 receptors on both lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells. This investigation evaluates IgE synthesis modulated by R-alpha-methylhistamine, an agonist selective for H 3 receptors. Methods: Supernatants obtained after 9days culture of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from 10 healthy donors and 12 ragweed allergic subjects during the pollen season were assayed for total IgE by CAP FEIA method (Phadia). Concentrations of pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL1b, TNFa, IL4 and INFc) were assessed by ELISA in supernatants of PBMC pre-treated with R-alpha-methylhistamine (RMH). Loratadine and cimetidine were used as H 1 and H 2 histamine receptor antagonists. Results: RMH at 10 À5 M decreased IgE synthesis but at lower concentrations (10 À8 M) highly increased IgE synthesis up to 4-fold. Pre-treatment of PBMC by combined H 1 and H 2 antagonists modulated IgE synthesis in PBMC culture of healthy donors, with higher concentrations of RMH highly increasing IgE, while low concentrations reduced IgE. In cultures of PBMC of ragweed sensitive patients with ragweed allergen, IgE-regulatory activity was less pronounced than in healthy donor PBMC cultures. After simultaneous pretreatment of PBMC by H 1 and H 2 antago-nists, RMH dose-dependently decreased IgE synthesis in allergic patient cell cultures. IgE-modulatory effects were highly cytokine dependent, especially influenced by levels of IL4 and INFc. Conclusions: Histamine H 3 receptors may be involved in the regulation and modulation of IgE synthesis both in healthy donors and allergic patients. The impact of H 3 histamine receptor agonists such as Ralpha-methylhistamine on IgE synthesis by PBMC is dependent on the levels of IgEregulatory cytokines. 466 Effects of long-term low strength static magnetic field exposure on Th polarization in vitro Background: Unlike electromagnetic fields, for health effects from exposure to static magnetic fields (SMF), few studies have been carried out. Most of them are related to acute, high strenght SMF, measured in several units of tesla (T), trying to explain possible adverse health effects of exposure to magnetic resonance imaging. For effects of long term, low strength SMF, in the millitesla (mT) range, especially on immune cells, there is a just a few studies. Noboy has studied in vitro possible different biological effects of north (N) and south (S) magnetic pole so far. Only the N pole was used in all previous studies. The aim of this study was to investigate effect of long-term exposure of low strength SMF on in vitro Th1, Th2 and Th17 interleukin production. Method: Cultures of allogenic purified T lymphocytes and human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DC) induced to mature by lipopolysaccharide, were continuously exposed to 5 mT north and south pole of SMF. The samples were from healthy donors. Supernatants were assayed to quantify IFN-c, IL-4 and IL-17 by ELISA. Results: South pole of SMF increased release of IFN-c (almost 50% compared to control) in DC culture supernatants, and not affected the level of IL-4 and IL-17. North pole of SMF produced no significant changes in cytokines level. Conclusion: This is the first time in literature that has been shown in vitro different biological effect of N and S magnetic pole, what is unexplainable from the physics point of view. Not only this study will help better understanding effects of SMF on immune system, but also this selective effect on Th1 immune response could have Background: The adverse transfusion reactions are primarily caused by an 'allergic reaction', according to of monitoring structures of 2009-2011 made by the National Blood Centre, Italy. The allergic reactions of a patient during a blood transfusion and/or blood product transfusion, may be caused by allergens of the donor 0 s blood, by antibodies of an allergic donor or by an unknown component of the donor's blood. In general these reactions have mild symptoms: hives, edema, dizzinnes and headache, which occur during the transfusion, in these cases the infusion must be stopped immediately. Method: It is necessary to evaluate the total dosage of the donors' IgE, and if an anamnestic investigation reveals an evident symptomatology, we evaluate the donors' immune responsiveness to Phadiatop and Ambrosia with the test system ImmunoCap of Phadia S.r.l. of Thermo Fisher Scientific. In the study, which comprehends the transfusional reactions reported to the Center by the related departments, between 2008 and 2013, we found that 18 patients out of a total of 40 presented allergic reactions during the transfusion. Results: The transfusion reactions were caused by: fresh frozen plasma (15), platelet concentrate (2) and packed red blood cells s.b.c (1) . The symptons were hives, hives with itching and wheals, papular rash and hives with dispnea. The 25 donors who presented transfusion reactions were divided into 23 men and 2 women. In the questionnaire the donors reported mild symptoms of atopy, rhino-conjunctivitis, probably due to the sensitisation to the inhalants, but they did not report asma or ponfi, these symptons were mostly presented by pediatric patients. The total value of the IgE of patients transfused was between 2 and 2622 KU/l, this data coincided with the clinical history. The total value of IgE of the donors with a positive anamnesis was over 100 KU/l. Conclusion: The patient presented allergic symptoms after an infusion of blood prod-uct between 50 ml and 500 ml, therefore these reactions occur immediately during the infusion therapy. The departments must report the reactions with constancy and accuracy, even if the symptomatology vanishes in a brief period, moreover it's important to perform a medical accurate anamnesis of the donor to prove his suitability to transfusions. Background: Houttuynia cordata Thunb, well known as 'E-Sung-Cho' in Korea, has been used in traditional oriental medicine for the treatment of allergy. Alveolar epithelial cells produce many types of chemokines such as RANTES, TARC, or eotaxin induced by IL-Ib, IL-4 or TNF-a and may contribute to allergic disease by recruiting eosinophils. This was investigated the effect of each fraction of Houttuynia cordata Thunb extract on human bronchial epithelial A549 cells after allergic stimulation. Method: Cytotoxic effects of Houttuynia cordata Thunb extract were estimated via WST assay, A549 cells were stimulated with TNF-a (100 ng/ml) and IL-4 (100 ng/ ml) to induce chemokines. Then after treatment of each fraction (10 lg/ml), inhibition effect assay were estimated by sandwich ELISA. Results: Treatment with each fraction (10 lg/ml) for 48 h showed no significant decrease in the survival rate of the A549 cells. We demonstrated that TNF-a and IL-4 induced the accumulation of chemokines in the pulmonary epithelial cell lines A549. After the treatment with 10 lg/ml each fraction for 48 h, expression of RAN-TES decreased up to 75% by EtOAc and 77% by Hexane fraction. In addition, expression of TARC significantly was inhibited up to 86% by EtOAc fraction. Conclusion: In the results of present study, EtOAc fraction of Houttuynia cordata Thunb suppressed the TNF-a and IL-4stimulated TRAC and RANES production in the human bronchial epithelial A549 cells. Based on the present results, Houttuynia cordata Thunb may be useful in the treatment asthmatic allergy by inhibiting TARC and RANTES chemokines. Background: Bone marrow-derived mesenchimal stem cells (MSC) could improve a variety of immunemediated disease by its immunmodulatory properties. In previous studies positive effects of mesenchimal stem cells was shown on airway remodelling and airway inflammation in chronic asthmatic mice. In our study we investigate effects of bone marrow derived stem cells on mice with allergic rhinitis. Materials and methods: Twenty-seven mice were divided into five groups; • group I (control), • group II (ovaalbumin induced allergic rhinitis only), • group III (ovaalbumine induced allergic rhinitis + MSC 1 million), • group IV (ovaalbumine induced allergic rhinitis + MSC 2 million), • group V (MSC, only). Except for group I and V, all mice were sensitised by an intraperitoneal injection of ovaalbumine with alum adjuvant and then challenged with intranasal ovaalbumine on twice a day for 1 week, beginning from 14st day of the study. Lung and nasal histology was evaluated after treatment with 1 and 2 million MSC, plasebo. Interleukin-4, IL-5, IL-13 and NO levels were studied in lung homogenates and nasal fluid. Results: In light microskopic evaluation both mesenchimal stem cell groups are ameliorates number of nasal goblet and mast cells compared with plasebo group. In allergic rhinitis groups (except for group I and V) histopathologic findings of asthma was shown, also. All of the lung histopathologic findings such as subepithelial smooth muscle thickness, epithelium thickness, number of goblet and mast cells were alleviated in both MSC groups compared with plasebo group. There were significantly decreases of IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, NO levels in lung homogenats 2 million MSC group and IL4, in 1 million MSC group compared with plasebo. In nasal fluid all cytokin levels were significantly decreased both MSC groups compared with plasebo. Conclusion: Mesenchimal stem cells has positive effects on allergic airway disease. And in the future, it may be an alternative treatment of allergic airway diseaese. 474 Effect of ONO-4053, a DP1 (prostaglandin D 2 receptor) antagonist, on allergic rhinitis in a cynomolgus monkey model Yamaguchi, S; Okada, Y; Matsunaga, Y; Nambu, F Ono Pharmaceutical Co., LTD., Osaka, Japan Background: As prostaglandin D 2 (PGD 2 ), a chemical mediator released in large amounts from mast cells, is known to be involved in upper airways allergic responses, blockage of PGD 2 action might be beneficial for the treatment of nasal allergies. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of ONO-4053, a DP1 (PGD 2 receptor) antagonist, on allergic rhinitis in a cynomolgus monkey model. Method: All experiments were performed in Ascaris suum-sensitive cynomolgus monkeys. Animals were anesthetized, intubated, and mechanically ventilated. Changes in the level of chemical mediators, inflammatory cells, and cytokines in nasal lavage fluid were determined before and after A. suum antigen nasal challenge. The effect of ONO-4053 on antigen-induced decrease in nasal volume was evaluated by acoustic rhinometry for up to 8 h after antigen challenge. ONO-4053 was intravenously infused to animals starting 1 h prior to antigen challenge and continuing until the end of the experiment. Results: Antigen challenge resulted in a rapid increase in the amounts of PGD 2 , cysteinyl leukotrienes, and histamine. Nasal eosinophilia and elevated level of Th2 cytokines were also detected after antigen challenge. Moreover, antigen challenge produced a rapid and continuous decrease in nasal volume in the early (0-2 h) and late (2-8 h) phases of nasal allergic reaction. ONO-4053 completely inhibited this decrease in nasal volume both in the early and late phases. Conclusion: The results of this study show that ONO-4053 strongly inhibits antigeninduced nasal congestion in a cynomolgus monkey model of allergic rhinitis. It is therefore believed that this compound would be clinically useful in the treatment of allergic rhinitis. Background: Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (IHES) is a rare disorder defined by persistent blood eosinophilia, absence of secondary causes, and evidence of eosinophil-associated organ dysfunction. In some patients with hypereosinophilia (HE) may cause life-threatening complications, whereas other patients, referred to 'hypereosinophila of unknown significance (HE, US)' do not exhibit any organ damage. This retrospective analysis sought to summarize baseline clinical, and laboratory characteristics in patients with HES and HE, US and to review responses to treatment. Method: Clinical and laboratory data from patients having IHES or HE, US, between January 2004 and December 2013 at Hallym Sacred Heart Hospital, were collected retrospectively after chart review. Result: A total of 25 patients were enrolled; 7 patients (28.0%) were diagnosed with HE, US and 18 patients (72.0%) with IHES. The mean number of white blood cell and peak total eosinophil count (TEC) were significantly increased in patients with IHES, compared to those with HE, US (P = 0.008, respectively). FIP1L1-PDGFRA mutation analysis was done in 9 patients using in situ hybridization, and all showed negative. The most common clinical presenting symptom was gastrointestinal (44.4%), followed by constitutional symptoms (33.3%), and pulmonary (11.1%). All patients received corticosteroids as initial therapy. Seven patients (38.8%) showed complete response and 11 (61.1%) with partial response within a month. However, 9 patients (50.0%) recurred during tapering or discontinuation of corticosteroid. There was no significant association between treatment response and laboratory parameters including peak TEC, total IgE, eosinophil cationic protein or marrow eosinophilia. Conclusion: The majority of patients with IHES respond to corticosteroid therapy, however, discontinuation of corticosteroid is associated with recurrence. There are no clinical or laboratory markers to predict the prognosis of IHES. Background: Mastocytosis is a rare disease characterised by abnormal expansion and accumulation of tissue mast cells such as skin, bone marrow, intestines, liver, spleen, lymph nodes. Cutaneaous mastocytosis is a primary mast cell disorder. Method: Clinical and demographic features of patients diagnosed with cutaneous mastocytosis were reviewed retrospectively. Diagnoses of all patients were confirmed by pathological examination of skin biopsies taken from characteristic lesions that were reported as urticaria pigmentosa. Results: Twenty-eight patients were included. Eighty two percent of patients were male. Two patients had family history of mastocytosis and one had consanguinity. Initial appearance of skin lesions ranges between 1 month and 3 years of ages. Triggering factor was detected in 50% of patients. Food was the most common trigger (%21.4). Increase in weather temperature, trauma, drug and insect bite rarely lead to emerging of skin lesions. In addition to skin lesions there were two patients with cardiovascular system findings and one patient with pulmonary system findings those were related to mast cell mediator release. Basal triptase level was 7.5 AE 2.73 lg/l (5-11.6) . Conclusion: In this study; we assessed demographic and clinical features of 28 patients with cutanous mastocytosis. Although urticaria pigmentosa is the most common form of cutaneous mastocytosis and rarely lead to systemic involvement in pediatric population, local mediator release may lead to systemic symptoms such as anaphylaxis. Early diagnosis and follow up of patients and education of families are necessary for pediatric age group. 477 Hypereosinophilic syndrome with congenital heart disease Harmanci, K 1 ; Turhan, AB 2 ; Kocak, AK 3 ; Bor, O 2 1 Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Eskisehir, Turkey; 2 Pediatric Hematology, Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is a multisystem disease with peripheral eosinophilia of 1500/mm 3 eosinophils for at least 6 months' duration, multiple organ system involvement, and no evidence for other known causes of eosinophilia. Cardiovascular manifestations of the syndrome are the major source of morbidity and mortality. This report describes the surgical treatment of a patient with patent ductus arteriosus with HES. Case: Nine month old baby boy was admitted to our hospital with complaints of cough and wheezing. Physical examination had rhonchi in the lungs. Pansystolic murmur was present at the heart examination. Initial laboratory results included a white blood cell (WBC) count of 74000/ mm 3 , with 87% eosinophils. His hemoglobin was 14.8 g/dl, and platelet count was 325000/mm 3 . A peripheral blood smear revealed an abundance of eosinophils with multiple nuclear lobes. Considering the patient′s records, it was seen that the blood count, performed when the patient was 2day-old and 1-month-old, also provided information about the existence of hypereosinophilia. Stool was negative for ova and parasites. LDH and vitamin B12 levels were normal. The Total and specific IgE levels were normal too. Lymphoid subpopulations were normal. No clonal T-cell receptor rearrangement was found. Bone marrow aspiration showed a hypercellular bone marrow with 50% mature eosinophils and eosinophil precursors, without blasts. The marrow findings were not considered consistent with a malignant or dysmyelopoietic process. RT-PCR failed to demonstrate the FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene in peripheral blood. Chest x-ray were normal. Tryptase levels were normal and C kit (A2457) mutation was not detected. Cytogenetic chromosomal analysis revealed a normal karyotype. M mode and 2D echocardiography showed a patent ductus arteriosus, and areas of increased echodensity in the region of the apex of the left ventricle and the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve, suggesting endocardial thickening. Patient 5 days 1 mg/kg dose of methyl prednisolone was given systemically. congenital heart defect has been corrected. Patient follow-up is still continuing without medication now and eosinophil levels observed are approximately 2500-4000/ mm 3 . In this article, we wanted to show that HES could be seen at very early ages, and also notify HES accompanying congenital heart disease is an extremely rare case. 478 Therapeutic challenges in a case of mastocytosis Background: Mastocytosis comprises a group of rare disorders characterised by a pathologic increase in clonal mast cells in tissues including skin, bone marrow, liver, spleen, and limph nodes. Although most patients seek medical advice for the cutaneous manifestations of mastocytosis, alergists and dermatologists should perform an extensive search for systemic involvement. Case report: We present the case of a 42year-old female patient initially diagnosticated with urticaria pigmentosa based on the clinical picture, skin biopsy, normal bone marrow biopsy findings and increased levels of serum tryptase (17 lg/l). The patient had experienced multiple episodes of anaphylaxis with various triggers (NSA-IDs, food). The patient was instructed to avoid triggers; treatment with oral H1 and H2 antihistamines and phototherapy was recommended, as well as epinephrine as needed. Parallel with the extension of the skin lesions, serum tryptase levels increased and subsequent bone marrow biopsy revealed the presence of multifocal dense aggregates of mast cells, with atypical mast cells expressing CD25 and CD117/c-kit. The patient tested positive for D816V c-Kit mutation. These findings together with the lack of further criteria for the diagnosis of aggressive systemic mastocytosis lead to the diagnostic of indolent sistemic mastocytosis. We decided to postpone initiation of cytoreductive therapy and to carefully monitor the patient in order to promptly detect disease progression. Discussions: This case represents a true therapeutic challenge due to the lack of symptoms control with conventional medication. Other options have been considered. Interpheron treatment is indicated in aggressive systemic mastocytosis, but the risk/benefit ratio in less aggressive forms of the disease is a matter of debate. Imatinib treatment was not a choice in our patient due to the presence of D816V c-Kit mutation. Close follow-up and an interdisciplinary approach is essential in similar situations. 480 An in vitro culture system to investigate vascular permeability on primary human vascular cells Background: Anaphylaxis is considered the most severe manifestation of allergic diseases and is described as a reaction with sudden onset that may cause death. Many organs are involved in anaphylaxis including the airways, skin, gastrointestinal system and vascular system. Particular the vascular system is of great interest due to the phenomenon of vascular permeability. In order to study the mechanisms of vascular permeability a reliable in vitro model of human vascular cells is needed. This study aimed at establishing an in vitro culture system for primary human endothelial cells (EC) and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) to investigate vascular permeability. Method: Human saphenous veins were obtained from resection of varicose veins. The veins were cut longitudinally and treated with collagenase I to detach EC. The veins were subsequently incubated with collagenase II to dissociate VSMC. To obtain pure cultures of EC, cells were further purified using magnetic-activated cell sorting targeting CD31. Purified EC and VSMC were passaged to a trans-well culture plate and grown to confluency. EC and VSMC were stimulated with histamine or CGRP and a change in vascular permeability was fluorescently assessed by FITCdextran measurement. Results: We were able to generate cultures of human EC and VSMC from saphenous veins. Permeability assays using EC showed a 1.5 and 1.4 fold increase in permeability when EC were stimulated with CGRP and histamine, respectively, compared to unstimulated EC. Preliminary results indicate that VSMC likewise respond to histamine stimulation with an increase in permeability. Conclusion: We have established an in vitro culture system to study vascular permeability on primary human EC and VSMC. Using this method we show that histamine and CGRP stimulation increase EC permeability. The culture system may be useful in studying other mediators of anaphylaxis and how these substances affect vascular cells. Boita, M 1 ; Pizzimenti, S 1 ; Raie, A 1 ; Heffler, E 1 ; Saraci, E 2 ; Omed e, P 2 ; Bucca, C 1 ; Bussolino, C 1 ; Rolla, G 1 1 Department Medical Science, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; 2 Division of Hematology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy Background: B-cell-activating factor (BAFF) is a member of the TNF superfamily, that exists both as a type II membrane protein (mBAFF) and as a soluble protein, which is thought to play an important role in autoimmune diseases. Human neutrophils have been shown to express BAFF mRNA and release high levels of sBAFF, when exposed to pro-inflammatory stimuli. The role of BAFF in allergic diseases is less known, as well it is not known whether human basophils express BAFF on their membrane. Aim: To investigate whether BAFF is expressed on the membrane of basophils of allergic patients and whether its membrane expression is increased by allergen exposure. Patients and methods: Peripheral blood of 10 patients (age 37.4 AE 11.5, 4 female) with allergic (grass and ragweed) rhinitis and 10 healthy controls (age 38.5 AE 11.8, 6 female) subjects was assessed for BAFF (CD257) expression by basophil activation test (BAT), before and after stimulation with IgE and allergens. Results: Basophils from allergic individuals and controls constitutively express BAFF on their membrane. No up-regulation of BAFF was observed following IgE or allergen stimulation neither in controls nor in patients. Conclusion: Human basophils from allergic and healthy subjects express membrane BAFF constitutively and its expression is not up-regulated by IgE or allergens Additional work is necessary to better understand the biological significance of this unsuspected function of basophils in allergic diseases. Supported by Fondazione Scientifica Mauriziana e Associazione Italiana Mastocitosi. 482 Effect of anti-IgE-IgE immune complexes on allergen induced basophil histamine release human IgG1 can bind to IgE to produce complexes which can potentially modulate basophil activation via low affinity IgG receptors. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether anti-IgE-IgE complexes can modulate in vitro allergen induced basophil histamine release. Methods: Whole blood basophil histamine release test using automated glass-fiber based microtiter plates coated with serial dilutions of each allergen was performed in 80 allergic rhinitis/asthma patients sensitised to perennial allergens as demonstrated by positive skin prick tests and elevated serum specific IgE levels. Before application of whole blood samples the plates were pre-incubated with mixtures of with patient's plasma with different concentrations of 3 different highly humanized monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies, or isotype control. Serum levels of total (tIgE) and allergen specific IgE (aIgE) were evaluated in serum using Phadia ImmunoCap. The results are expressed as percentage of total histamine release. Results: Patients selected for the study had elevated serum tIgE level (mean 245.7 kU/ l; 95% CI 154-336 kU/l) and aIgE level (mean 10.3 kU/l; 95% CI 7.1-13.5 kU/l). The mean allergen induced histamine release evaluated in the plates pre-incubated with mixtures of patient's plasma with MAB anti-IgE -1 (17.4 AE 14.2%), MAB anti-IgE-2 (17.8 AE 13.9%), or MAB Anti-IgE-3 (18.6 AE 14.2%) were not significantly different than those pre-incubated with an isotype control-plasma mixture (19.3 AE 15.1%). Conclusion: Anti-IgE-IgE complexes do not affect allergen induced histamine release from basophils in vitro. Regarding diseases like inflammatory bowel disease or allergies, new therapeutic agents with a better compliance among patients such as potent anti-inflammatory nutraceuticals would be of interest. Nobiletin, a polymethoxy flavonoid, present in citrus fruit peel shows anticancer, neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory activities. Here, we analyzed the effect of nobiletin on activation of human and rodent mast cells via different stimuli. Method: Mast cells isolated from human intestinal tissue or RBL-2H3 cells were treated with citrus flavonoid nobiletin and activated via FceRI receptor, LPS/sCD14 or Ionomycin/PMA. Degranulation and expression of diverse anti-inflammatory cytokines was examined. Results: For all stimuli analyzed -IgE/ anti-IgE, Ionomycin/PMA or LPS/sCD14 nobiletin treatment led to reduced degranulation as well as reduced de novo synthesis of proinflammatory mediators. bhexosaminidase release and mRNA expression of CXCL-8, IL-1b, CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, TNF and tryptase were thereby decreased in a dose-dependent manner. Conclusion: Nobiletin could act as antiinflammatory agent by inhibiting degranulation and proinflammatory cytokine expression in mast cells. This inhibitory effect is not limited to IgE-dependent activation, but also present in stimulation via LPS/sCD14 and Ionomycin/PMA. Background: Molecular diagnosis of allergic diseases has been facilitated by the introduction of ImmunoCAP ISAC Multiplexing, but there are few studies about the correlation with ImmunoCAP Specific IgE. We performed a study to know the correlation of molecular allergens in our city, using InmunoCap ISAC multiplexing comparing to InmunoCap specific IgE to different major allergens. Method: We collected data of all the 122 patients, who were asked ImmunoCAP ISAC with diagnostic purpose, seen at the outpatient allergy clinic of the University Alicante Hospital from the last 4 years. ImmunoCAP ISAC multiplexing using 103/112 molecular components immobilised on the biochip) and ImmunoCAP specific IgE to all the major allergens of our area as Pollens (olive, weeds, and grasses), mites, fungi, epithelia and panallergens (LTP) (Thermo Fisher Scientic, U.K.) were carried out to comparison in these patients. The ImmunoCAP ISAC tests were considered positive when they were greater than 0.3 ISU-E and Immuno-CAP specific IgE greater than 0.35 kUA/l. Descriptive statistical analysis and Correlation of Pearson (R 2 ) was performed with SPSS. Results: Pollens: Olive (Ole e 1 vs t9) R 2 = 0.851 P < 0.01; Weeds (Sal k 1 vs W11) R 2 = 0.403 P > 0.05; Grasses (Phl p 1 vs G5) R 2 = 0.895 P < 0.01; Mites: Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Der p 1 vs d1) R 2 = 0.880 P < 0.01; Dermatophagoides farinae (Der f 1 vs d2) R 2 = 0.768 P < 0.01; Fungi: Alternaria alternata (Alt a 1 vs m6) R 2 = 0.769 P < 0.05; Epithelia: Dog (Can f 1 vs e5) R 2 = 0.152 P > 0.05; Cat (Fel d 1 vs e1) R 2 = 0.565 P > 0.05; Panallergens: Peach (Pru p 3 vs f420)) R 2 = 0.152 P > 0.05. Conclusion: Olive, Grasses, Mites and Fungi got significant and good correlations. However, Weeds, Epithelia and Panallergens did not. The profile of molecular allergens of the patients in our area is very important for diagnostic and cross-reactive purposes. inhibited a maximum of 94.5 and 95.8%, respectively. However, white oak extract was able to inhibit 43.2% of IgE binding to white birch extract, while white birch extract inhibited 50.5% at an inhibitor concentration of 10 lg/mL. In CAP inhibition analysis, specific IgE to Bet v 1 was inhibited 67.4% by sawtooth oak, 41.6% by Mongolian oak, 76.5% by white oak, and 53.1% by white birch at an inhibitor concentration of 2 lg/mL. Bet v 1 was partially able to inhibit its homologous molecules from sawtooth oak and white oak in immunoblotting analysis. Conclusion: A significant portion of IgE reactivity to birch pollen extract is thought to be a cross-reaction mainly by oak pollen in Korea. Sawtooth oak is believed to be a main source of sensitisation in Korea. Bet v 1 like allergens from oaks were shown to be major allergens. However, its cross-reactivity to Bet v 1 was limited. Therefore, it is necessary to characterise major allergens from oaks native to Korea. 487 Response to major peanut and peach allergens in a population of children allergic to peanut Background: We studied sensitisation to peanut allergens in a population of children allergic to foods of vegetal origin as well as the relationship with peach allergy. Method: All children referring symptoms to allergens of vegetal origin were included. They were classified in two groups: (A) those allergic to peanut with good tolerance to peach and (N = 60) (B) those allergic to peach and peanut (N = 30). The IgE response measured by skin prick test and ImmunoCAP to several peanut and peach allergens and the relationship with the different clinical entities was analyzed. Results: A total of 349 children were evaluated. The 28% referred symptoms after peanut ingestion. Mean age was 10.48 y.o. with 68% sensitised to pollens. The most relevant involved were grass, olive, plantanus and artemisia. From the total group 25% had anaphylaxis, 52% had urticaria and 23% OAS. IgE positive was found to peanut allergens (Ara h1, 2, 3, 9) and to Pru p3 isolated or in combinations being Ara h2 the most relevant found. When we compared the groups with symptoms only to peanut with those who developed symptoms to both there were differences in the sex ratio (P = 0.05), the atopic status (P = 0.01). We found more anaphylaxis in those of group A (P < 0.05) and more OAS (P < 0.05) in those of group B. When we analyzed the IgE response to the individual allergens the pattern of response was similar in both groups. Conclusion: Although peanut allergy is frequent in a children population the pattern of response and the relationship with peach allergy is complex. A tendency to see more anaphylaxis in children only sensitised to peanut and in OAS in those sensitised to peanut and peach was observed. These data require more detailed studies on the individual response to isolated allergens in order to establish the individual response and the cross-reactivity between both families of allergens. Background: The purpose of this study is to evaluate the clinical features and grass pollen sensitisation pattern in patients who have been attended in the Allergy Department in an area with low grass pollen concentrations. Method: Patients with rhinitis and/or asthma with positive cutaneous tests to grass pollen. Grass recombinant allergens quantification: rPhl p1, rPhl p5, rPhl p7 and rPhl p12. In those patients with food allergy symptoms we carried out cutaneous tests to food extracts and rPru p3, if it was indicated. Positive recombinant allergen was considered for values higher than 0.35 kU/l. Results: Hundred patients were included (56 men) with a mean age of 38.02 years old. Eight percent of the patients were immigrants from other countries. Three percent of the patients were monosensitised to grass pollen, and the other were sensitised to other pollens and/or other allergens (42% to house dust mite, 47% to animal dander, 5% to molds and 1% to latex). Sixty-nine pecent of studied patients had rhinitis and 31%, asthma with or without rhinitis. Food allergy was present in 32% of the patients: fruit (25%), nuts (24%), vegetables (8%), cereals (7%), legumes (6%) and seafood (6%). Grass recombinant allergen quantification showed positivity for rPhl p1 in 89% of the patients (89/100), for rPhl p5, in 36% (35/ 98), for rPhl p7 in 19% (14/74) and for rPhl p12 in 15% of the patients (11/75). rPru p3 was positive in 19 of 28 patients (68%). There were no statistically significant differences between sensitisation to specific recombinant allergens and gender, age, nationality or food allergy. Conclusion: In our area, the number of monosensitised patients to grass pollen is very low (3%). Sensitisation to grasses is mainly due to rPhl p1. Although there is a high percentage of polisensitised patients, the number of patients with polcalcin or profilin sensitisation is low. It would be interesting to compare our data with patients data from a geographic area with a high concentration of grass pollen. Background: Component-resolved diagnostics is becoming increasingly important in allergy diagnostics. We analysed the prevalence of sensitisation to individual components and protein families in a Dutch tertiary patient population using the multiplex Immuno-Solid phase Allergen Chip (ISAC). Our aim was to determine sensitisation patterns and the proteins families involved in the population. Method: Multiplex ISAC tests were performed within our academic outpatient clinic in case of suspicion of (extensive) poly-sensitisation. Results: Of 874 ISAC tests, 787 showed sensitisation to at least one component and were included for further analysis. The majority of patients in our population was poly-sensitised, with 68% recognizing more than ten components. The most frequently recognised components were PR-10 proteins. Seventy-three pecent of the population recognised at least one PR-10 component, followed by 29% for storage proteins and 19% for non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTP). The prevalence of sensitisation to cross-reactive carbohydrate determinants (CCD) was 13%. Extensive co-sensitisation was seen within the PR-10 family. PR-10 sensitised subjects were on average sensitised to 7.2 of the 10 available PR-10 components. The top 10 inhalation allergens in our population were birch (Bet v 1; 70%), alder (Aln g 1; 65%), hazel (Cor a 1.0101; 61%), timothy (Phl p 1; 61%), bermuda (Cyn d 1; 57%), mite (Der f 2; 55%, Der p 2; 54%, Der f 1; 49%, Der p 1; 49%) and cat (Fel d 1; 55%). The top 10 food allergens were: apple (Mal d 1; 65%), peach (Pru p 1; 63%), hazelnut (Cor a 1.0401; 63%), peanut (Ara h 8; 56%, Ara h 6; 23%, Ara h2; 15%), soy (Gly m 4; 39%), celery (Api g 1; 25%), kiwi (Act d 8; 20%) and walnut (Jug r 2; 15%). Conclusion: Bet v 1 is the allergen component recognised the most, followed closely by other PR-10 family proteins. Sensitisation to nsLTPs and CCD plays a limited role in our patient population. Here we present a comprehensive review on the past and present of modern allergy diagnostics in China. Methods: We searched publications on this topic in Wanfang and Medline database using keywords 'allergy research', 'allergy diagnosis ' and 'China' from 1938 to 2013. Allergy research in ancient China was also reviewed in medical history books. Major methods in allergy diagnosis in China were discussed. Results: China may be one of the countries which acknowledged allergy response in ancient times in the world. The earliest observation of horse induced allergy response by humankind from the concept of modern medicine was recorded in ancient documents by Chinese emperor Shen Nung. One thousand eight hundred and forty-three papers were searched in Wanfang database with allergen detection as keyword. After analysis, nearly 300 hospitals or medical research institutes published manuscripts related with allergen detection. SPT is the most widely used invivo allergy test in China, followed by APT. Allergen reagents resources are complexity. ELISA was the most widely used in-vitro allergen test in China, followed by allergen screen test and ImmunoCAP. Im-munoCAP was available in 65% of the provinces based on the manuscripts resource institutions in database. IgG4 and ISAC system have been introduced in China now and they are still in research field not in clinical practice. Only 35% AE 28% of the otolaryngologists used SPT or specific IgE serum test in clinical practice, while 74% of them could perform SPT. The major allergen in China varies from geographic conditions. Conclusion: A variety of methods have been applied in China while none of them alone could provide a reasonable and sufficient detection panel for screening, which may be due to differences in geographic regions and allergen diversity. Chinese Allergen atlas should be finished through multi-centre survey. The allergen reagents resources in China are complex and there is a still great demand for high-quality reagents used in allergen detection. The national GMP of allergen detection reagents and GLP of application of allergens in different allergic diseases needs to be published and drafted, national guideline for allergic diseases should be drawn and it is suggested that clinicians need continuous education in allergy diagnostics. Background: Data on allergic sensitisation and prevalence of allergic diseases in the elderly are scarce. As cross-sectional studies performed in mid age patients (>45 years of age) hint to a decrease in IgE with age, it was hypothesized that true de novo sensitisation does not occur in the elderly. Observations on food allergy in patients >70 years have demonstrated cross-reactive sensitisations as well as de novo sensitisation and allergy following loss of stomach acidity. In our catchment area birch and mugwort are the most prevalent allergens. Our study aims at (1) describing the prevalence of sensitisation and allergic disease in the aged and (2) to assess whether new allergic disease may be observed after age 60. Method: Eight hundred and eighty-eight aged permanent residents of our region in three age strata (60-69, 70-79, and 80-89 years) were studied following informed consent, employing physical examination, questionnaires based on ECRHS II, and RHINASTHMA, and residential data, skin prick testing with common pollen, dust mite allergens, aspergillus, celery and melon and serological testing for sIgE 0 s. Results: Evaluation of the first 566 probands demonstrates that sensitisation to any allergen was demonstrable in SPT in 31%, decreasing with age (60-69: 36%, 70-79: 29% 80-89: 17%). Birch sensitisation was by far the most common. Sensitisation to ambrosia only (not mugwort, not birch) occurred in only 2.4%. Atopy was not a risk factor for sensitisation observed in the aged. RCA affected 27%, of whom only 20% started before age 20, and 18% after age 60. Just 8.6% suffered from atopic eczema, which had started in 24% of those affected at < 20 years, in 35% between 20 and 60, and 41% past 60 years. Eight pecent suffered from asthma, of whom 20% had been newly diagnosed past age 60. Data on comorbidities will be presented. Conclusion: Allergic diseases do affect the true elderly. Even though the burden of disease decreases with age, the projected development of age distribution for the next decades will necessitate services directed at therapy for these patients. Part of the ATOPICA-FP7 project. Investigation of galactose-a-1,3-galactose epitope and immunoproteomic characterisation of thermally processed beef proteins Background: Red meat allergy presents a novel form of food allergy with severe delayed allergic reactions, where the sensitisation is directed against the major carbohydrate antigen galactose-a-1,3-galactose (a-Gal). Food preparation, processing as well as presence of non-protein components in food, presumably exhibit a role in the pathogenesis. The aim of this study was to analyse proteins from different forms of processed meat by immunoproteomic in order to identify proteins containing major IgE binding epitopes and to investigate their a-Gal reactivity. Method: Extracts from raw, well-cooked, fried and medium rare beef meat were assessed by 2D PAGE and Image 2D Master Platinum 7.0 software for comparison of the protein profiles. Several IgE-binding proteins were identified in an immunoblotcoupled proteomic analysis by using a serum pool of meat allergic patients with an IgE response to a-Gal and beef. Presence of a-Gal epitope was identified and verified by binding of anti-a-Gal monoclonal antibody and by an a-Gal-IgE-inhibition immunoblot assay. Results: Comparison of 2D PAGE protein profiles revealed 53 matched protein spots among raw and medium rare beef extracts, and 35 protein matches among well-cooked and fried beef extracts. IgE-reactive protein spots in immunoproteomic analysis were subsequently analysed by MS/MS and 18 proteins with high identification scores were detected. Among the identified proteins were BSA and myoglobin that both are well-known beef allergens. Eighty percent of proteins from processed beef extract were recognised by the anti-a-Gal antibody. Also, inhibition of IgE binding of red meat allergic patients' sera to beef by a-Gal was demonstrated. Conclusion: We have shown that the a-Gal epitope is commonly present in IgE-binding proteins from processed beef meat. Thus the allergenicity of beef proteins is preserved even upon thermal processing. Background: Describe the pattern of sensitisation to rPhl p 1, rPhl p 5, rPhl p 7 and rPhl p 12 among our paediatric population, following an age distribution. Method: A description of 120 patients followed up at our Paediatric Allergy clinic (during 2013) in which molecular diagnosis was performed. In this study the pattern of sensitisation to rPhl p 1, rPhl p 5, rPhl p 7 and rPhl p 12 was evaluated in children with asthma and/or rhinoconjunctivitis and grass pollen allergy, in order to evaluate the frequency of sensitisation to allergenic molecules of Phleum pratense. Population was distributed in three groups: those under 6 years (Group 1), those aged 6-12 (Group 2) and those over 12 (Group 3). Results: Fifteen patients belonged to Group1, 72 to Group2 and 33 to Group 3. In Group 1: specific IgE to rPhl p1 was found in all patients, 50% were sensitised to rPhl p 5, 20% to rPhl p 12, none were sensitised to rPhl p 7. In Group 2: 86.5%; 44.3%; 9.3 y 21.6% were sensitised to rPhlp1, rPhlp5, rPhl p7 y rPhl p12 respectively. In Group 3: specific IgE is positive to rPhl p1 in 92.8%; 37% to rPhl p5; 14.3% to rPhl p7 and 18.2% to rPhl p12. 83.3% of studied patients had asthma. There were not significant differences in the pattern of sensitisation of asthmatic patients compared to those who were not. Conclusion: Our data show the predominant role of rPhl p1 in our paediatric population as the most relevant sensitising allergen detectable in all age groups. It seems that the importance of sensitisation to panallergens (rPhl p7 and rPhl p12) increases along with patient's age. Poster Session Group I -Blue TPS 4 -Allergy, asthma and sport 496 Asthma and allergy screening in elite football players: results from a 6-year follow-up of a Champions League team Asthma and allergies are commonly reported in water and endurance athletes yet the usefulness of screening football players has not yet been determined. The aim of this study was to assess the usefulness of asthma and allergy screening in elite football players. In this 6-year real-world follow-up, prevalence of asthma and allergy were assessed in a Champions League team. Each of the 104 included athletes underwent lung function reversibility testing, skin prick test, and clinical interview. An athlete was confirmed asthmatic if had a positive bronchodilator test and with allergic rhinitis if had nasal symptoms with positive skinprick test. Prevalence of asthma was 6.7%; of allergic rhinitis 20.2% and of atopy defined by positive skin prick tests of 26%. Three athletes (2.9%) had a diagnosis of anaphylaxis with food allergy. All baseline lung tests were normal: mean FEV1 value of 4.93 L (95%CI 4.80-5.07); mean % predicted FEV1 of 107% (95%CI 104-109); mean FEF2575 of 5.59 L/s ); and mean % predicted FEF2575 of 106% (95%CI 101-110). Only baseline FEF2575 was significantly different in asthmatic athletes (mean difference of 0.49 L/s (95%CI 0.05-1.99); P = .04. Asthma and allergic rhinitis were common conditions among elite football players. The number of athletes needed to screen for one diagnosis of asthma was 14.9; for rhinitis 5.2 and for anaphylaxis/ food allergy of 35.9. Moreover, they were not previously diagnosed which potentially may impair athletic performance and recovery if not treated. Therefore this study provides support for screening asthma and allergy in these elite athletes. Background: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory condition of the lungs leads to the narrowing of the airways. It 0 s one of the most common chronic diseases in different ages, sex and races all over the world. It has a great impact on the physical, emotional and social quality of life of affected individual. Objectives: To assess the quality of life of a sample of asthmatic adolescents from Saudi Arabia, through an Arabic adaptation of the mini AQLQ and PAQLQ questionnaires, and to determine whether differences exist between asthmatics and healthy teenagers of equivalent age. Methods: A questionnaire was conducted on a sample of 135 Saudi asthmatic patients aged 11-19 years old who were randomly selected and a 146 healthy control subject with similar age range. The questionnaire covered questions related to day to day activities, environmental, emotional, as well as social life. The data was analyzed using SPSS and GraphPad prism software. Mann-whitney 0 s, one-way ANO-VA, Bartlett 0 s test and Bonferroni 0 s multiple comparison tests were used to determine significant differences among the 4 asthmatic groups and healthy subjects. Results: Mean age of asthmatic patients was 13.06 years (SDAE1.823) while that of healthy individual was 14.5778 years (SDAE2.29036). Our data indicated that compared to healthy adolescents, asthma had a negative impact Saudi asthmatic adolescents including increased school absences, emotional disorder and restriction of social and physical activities. Also, asthmatic patients were bothered by dust, cigarettes smoke and weather more than the healthy individuals. These findings indicated that Saudi adolescents with asthma had lower perceived quality of life score than healthy ones. Conclusion: Our data indicated that asthma had a negative impact on the quality of life of Saudi asthmatic adolescents. This study will educate the patients families as well as the society in large about the effect of asthma on the adolescents and hence encourages ways to minimize that especially in public places. It will also increase the government's attention about the asthmatic adolescents 0 outcome in school absents and the design of an appropriate workplace in the future. Background: Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) is highly prevalent in endurance athletes and may impact on their health and performance. In athletes a secure diagnosis is dependent upon objective testing and the eucapnic voluntary hyperpnoea (EVH) test is recommended for this purpose. The short and long-term repeatability of EVH in the setting of amateur athletes is not established, yet has implications for both screening and treatment surveillance. Method: Thirty-six sub-elite athletes were recruited to take part in the present study. Subjects were required to attend the laboratory on three separate occasions separated by a short-term period of either 14 or 21 days and a long-term period of 10 months respectively. Pulmonary function assessment including spirometry and impulse oscillometry (IOS) was conducted before and following an EVH challenge. Results: Over the short-term period eleven athletes were diagnosed with EIB at visit one and eleven athletes at visit two. Only seven athletes were positive at both visits. Over the long-term period nine athletes were diagnosed with EIB at visit one and ten athletes at visit two. No significant difference was observed in maximum change in FEV 1 (DFEV 1 max) post EVH between visits (P = 0.115) and test-retest DFEV 1max was strongly correlated (ICC = 0.76; r 2 = 0.58; P = 0.001). Although there was only a small bias in DFEV 1 max between tests (À1.56%) the data exhibited wide limits of agreement (À13.8 to 10.7%). Conclusion: In our cohort of sub-elite athletes, EVH demonstrated poor repeatability over both short and long-term periods. These findings highlight the need for caution when considering confirming or refuting a diagnosis of EIB based on a one-time indirect bronchoprovocation test utilising a cut-off value of 10% fall in FEV 1 . Background: Sustained intense exercise can result in exercise-induced bronchoconstriction in elite swimmers, which may be linked to epithelial damage. Objective: To study airway epithelial damage and release of damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) after intense exercise in elite athletes and controls. Method: Competitive non-asthmatic swimmers (n = 26), competitive non-asthmatic indoor athletes (n = 13) and control subjects (n = 15) were evaluated before, immediately after and 24 h after a 90-min intense exercise protocol. Sputum induction was performed at baseline and 24 h after exercise. Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) was assessed by eucapnic hyperventilation at baseline. Results: Baseline sputum uric acid, High Mobility Group Box-1, IL-8 mRNA and neutrophil levels were significantly higher in competitive swimmers compared to control subjects. Intense exercise induced sputum IL-1b, IL-6 and TNF mRNA in competitive swimmers. Even in control subjects, sputum IL-6 mRNA and sputum neutrophils significantly increased after intense exercise. Baseline serum Clara Cell protein-16 (CC-16) levels were significantly higher in both competitive swimmers and indoor athletes compared to controls. Seven competitive swimmers met the criteria for EIB, whereas this was observed in one indoor athlete and one control subject. Conclusion: Competitive swimmers had higher degree of epithelial damage, sputum DAMP molecules and neutrophils in the airways, which cannot be attributed to preexisting asthma. Intense exercise induced an increase in innate cytokines in the airways of swimmers. These findings point towards epithelial damage in the airways of elite athletes as a result of intensive training, especially when combined with exposure to by-products of chlorination. Background: Dysautonomia has been independently associated with both endurance training and exercise-induced bronchoconstriction. Moreover, neurogenic airway inflammation was recently associated with swimmers-asthma. We aimed to assess the impact of the autonomic nervous system function on airway responsiveness and asthma in elite swimmers. Method: Twenty-seven elite swimmers, of which 11 had asthma, were enrolled in this exploratory cross-sectional study. After resting for 15 min in a semi-dark room, pupillometry (PLR-200 TM Pupillometer) was performed. One pupil light response curve for each eye was recorded and mean values of pupil's diameters before and at constriction peak, % of constriction, average and maximum constriction velocities (parasympathetic parameters), dilation velocity, and total time to recover 75% of the initial size (sympathetic parameters) were used for analysis. Asthma was defined using IOC-MC criteria; subjects were divided by AHR severity accordingly to PD20 in: no AHR (>7.80), very mild (3.21-7.80), mild (0.81-3.20), moderate (0.11-0.80) and severe (≤0.10) AHR. Results: A tendency to lower pupil diameters, a higher % of constriction and a higher maximum constriction velocity were observed in asthmatics, although differences between groups were not significant. When stratified by AHR severity, maximal and minimal diameters, and % of constriction were significantly lower among those with severe AHR. Conclusion: In our sample, a trend to increased parasympathetic activity was observed among asthmatic compared to non-asthmatic swimmers, especially among those with severe AHR. This exploratory study provides support to the hypothesis of a neuroimmune interaction on the development of AHR by exposure to chlorination products, but further research with larger sample is needed. Background: Elite athletes are at increased risk of immunodeficiency diseases. Winter sport has an especially high risk of upper respiratory tract infections during periods of heavy exercise and for up to 2 weeks following sporting events. This investigation analyzes the effects of specialised diets enriched by macro and micronutrients including microelements and antioxidants on immune responses of elite winter athletes. Method: Eleven elite athletes who ski were assessed at the Scientific Institute of Nutrition, Moscow, Russia, as well as during training period outside of Russia. Lymphocyte sub-populations were assessed by flow cytometry (Cytomics FC500, Beckman Coulter). Levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL1b, TNFa, IL6) in sera were measured by ELISA. Vitamin A, C, E, bcarotene and total carotenoid levels in serum were assessed by HPLC. An adequate dietary intake of protein and specific micronutrients including vitamins B, A, C, E, b-carotene along with iron, zinc, copper and selenium was used as a dietary supplement. Results: A decreased immunoregulatory index (CD4+/CD8+) occurred in 3 of 11 athletes due to low levels of CD4+ cells. Two athletes had marked reduction in CD8+ cells. Most athletes after intense exercise had decreased numbers of activated T-cells (CD25+). Up to 50% of athletes had reduced numbers of NK lymphocytes (CD3+16+56+ cells). Seven of 11 of athletes had deficiency of b-carotene and decreased levels of total carotenoids. Pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL1b, TNFa, IL6) were increased more than 3-4 -fold in most athletes. Supplementation with specialised diets usually normalised these cellular and cytokine parameters. The level of total carotenoids remained lower, however, in comparison to normal levels. Conclusion: Immune suppression reflected in altered lymphocyte sub-populations in winter sport elite athletes enduring prolonged intense exercise was mainly seen in T-helper and NK cell sub-populations, as well as increased production of proinflammatory cytokines. Changes in lymphocyte subpopulations may be related to low levels of anti-oxidative micronutrients. Factors inducing immune suppression may include low serum levels of anti-oxidative carotenoids and b-carotene. Low levels of anti-oxidative nutrients may increase immune suppression induced by intense physical activity by skiers. Specialised diets including macro and micro nutrients appear to normalise most altered immune functions. Background: Respiratory heat exchange has been proposed as one of the mechanisms of exercise induced asthma. Therefore, we hypothesized that an increase in exhaled breath temperature (EBT) would be observed in asthmatic compared to nonasthmatic elite swimmers after strenuous exercise. Method: Twenty-two elite swimmers accepted to participate this study. Each subject performed skin prick tests, lung function, salbutamol reversibility, and airway responsiveness to metacholine. Asthma was defined according to International Olympic Committee criteria. EBT was measured with X-halo thermometer before and after a swimming training session in the pool. Swimmers performed training with different intensities (mild aerobic, moderate/severe aerobic, mild anaer-obic and moderate/severe aerobic trainings). SPSS (P < 0.05) was used to compare asthmatic and healthy swimmers. Results: EBT significantly increased after the training session (P = 0.02) for all subjects, even after adjustment for potential confounders: training intensity, axilar temperature, therapeutic with inhaled steroids and the number of hours trained in the last week. Asthmatic swimmers presented significantly higher airway responsiveness, but no differences were observed for baseline (P = 0.10), and post-exercise (P = 0.28) EBTs, nor for the EBT increase with the training session (P = 0.22). Conclusion: We failed to observe a higher increase of EBT in asthmatic swimmers compared to healthy ones. Our observations failed to support the respiratory heat exchange theory as a mechanism of exercise induced asthma, but provide support to the recent reported hypothesis of airway hyperesponsiveness induced by chloramines exposure and activation of nociceptive airway sensory nerves independent of inflammation. Innate immune protein levels in serum of competitive speed skatersassociation with exercise load, training conditions and exercise-induced bronchoconstriction Background: Intensive exercise provokes changes in the innate immune response which may increase systemic inflammation and modify susceptibility to respiratory infections. The aim of the present study was to analyse innate immunity parameters in professional endurance athletes in the context of training conditions and exercise load. Method: Study group consisted of 36 competitive speed skaters aged 11-21. Control group comprised 22 healthy, non-smoking subjects not performing sports regularly. Athletes were assessed from January to March (period Iintensive outdoor training in winter conditions) and May to July (period IItransition). Serum levels of Heat shock protein (HSP) A1, IL-1RA, IL-1b, soluble CD14, TNF-a, IL-6 and IL-10 were assessed by ELISA. Weather data were acquired from Weather Information Service available online. Data on exerciseinduced bronchoconstriction (EIB) and upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) were acquired from Allergy Questionnaire in Athletes (AQUA) and exercise load was assessed with International Physical Activity Questionnaire (IPAQ). Results: In athletes, serum HSPA1 and IL-1RA during period I were similar, while in period II significantly decreased compared to controls. HSPA1 and IL-1RA serum levels in athletes were significantly higher in period I as compared to period II. Serum IL-1RA level in period I negatively correlated with outside air temperature (R = À0.51; P = 0.003), dew point temperature (R = À0.39; P = 0.03) and positively correlated with exercise load (R = 0.46; P < 0.01). Percentage of IL-1RA change from period I to period II was negatively correlated with vigorous exercise load during period I (R = À0.64; P = 0.002). Serum IL-1RA levels in period I were significantly higher in skaters reporting EIB (3.78 vs 2.74 pg/ml; P = 0.02, mean log values), but not in skaters reporting frequent UR-TIs. No differences in serum sCD14 concentration were observed between athletes and controls. Serum levels of TNF-a, IL-6, IL-10 and IL-1b exceeded the detection threshold only in single subjects. Conclusion: During training season, parameters of innate immune response in athletes may be modified by exercise load and ambient conditions. Poster Session Group I -Blue TPS 5 -Anaphylaxis: clinical aspects 506 x5-gliadin specific IgE is a sensitive indicator to diagnose and predict wheat induced anaphylaxis in wheat allergy patients: a 5-year follow-up study Zhu, R Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Allergy, Wuhan, China Background: Wheat allergy has become common in China, and the symptoms varied from mild such as urticaria to severe. Wheat induced anaphylaxis is a severe form of wheat allergy and sometimes may be fatal. Previous studies suggested serum x5-gliadin specific IgE has a correlation with wheat dependent exercise induced anaphylaxis, but the role of x5-gliadin specific IgE in wheat induced anaphylaxis is still under controversial. Our study aimed to evaluate the value of serum x5-gliadin specific IgE in the diagnose and predict wheat induced anaphylaxis in wheat allergy patients. Method: One hundred fifty-two wheat allergy patients were enrolled in our study and were followed up to 5 years. Wheat allergy was defined as a suggestive history, positive skin prick test and/or positive serum IgE. A detailed history was recorded by telephone each year and serum specific IgE to wheat, gluten and x5-gliadin were measured at the beginning and the end of the study. All the patients were informed not to eat wheat. Wheat challenge tests were performed in the 5 th year. Results: Among the 152 patients, 94 were allergic rhinitis or allergic asthma, 43 were atopic dermatitis, and 15 were anaphylaxis. In the allergic rhinitis or asthma patients, the positive rate of specific IgE to wheat, gluten and x5-gliadin were 93.6%, 74.5% and 12.8% respectively; In the atopic dermatitis patients, the positive rate of specific IgE to wheat, gluten and x5-gliadin were 83.7%, 90.7% and 16.3%; but in anaphylaxis patients, the positive rate of specific IgE to wheat, gluten and x5-gliadin were 86.7%, 80.0% and 93.3%; The positive rate of x5gliadin IgE were significant difference in the three groups (P<0.05) and the level of x5-gliadin IgE had a strong correlation to wheat induced anaphylaxis (r = 0.944). Among the 33 x5-gliadin IgE positive patients, 18 patients developed anaphylaxis after wheat challenge test or ingest wheat unawareness, 7 in allergic rhinitis or asthma group, 1 in atopic dermatitis group and 10 in anaphylaxis group. However, only 2 patients experienced anaphylaxis after wheat challenge test in the 119 x5-gliadin IgE negative patients. Conclusion: Our study suggest serum x5gliadin is a sensitive indicator to diagnose and predict wheat induced anaphylaxis in wheat allergy patients, patient with a positive x5-gliadin IgE has a risk to develop anaphylaxis in future and the level of x5gliadin IgE has a positive correlation to wheat induced anaphylaxis. Background: Wheat is responsible for 60% of cases of food dependent exercise induced anaphylaxis (FDEIA) in Japan. It 0 s incidence in the Mediterranean Area is unknown and only a few series of patients have been reported. The diagnosis of this condition is based on a compatible medical history and the detection of specific IgE for x-5 gliadin. Method: We describe the demographic data, clinical characteristics and sensitivity patterns of 5 adult patients with recurrent episodes of urticaria and at least 1 episode of exercise-related anaphylaxis, occurring after the ingestion of wheat. All showed a positive x-5 gliadin IgE immunoCAP test. Results: The number of reported episodes, the intensity of the symptoms and the triggers were highly variable. Even though this condition is related to physical exercise, we found that the majority of the episodes were related to more than one trigger factor (lack of sleep, stress or NSAIDs intake), besides mild physical activity. Two patients were atopic (both sensitised to Dermatophagoides*). Prior to the diagnosis the patients had several emergency care assistances and were diagnosed with recurrent urticaria, idiopathic anaphylaxis or NSAIDs intolerance. Four of the 5 patients had a prolonged period of time between the onset of the symptoms and the diagnosis. Conclusion: Hypersensitivity to x-5 gliadin may be responsible for recurrent urticaria, anaphylaxis and FDEIA, all related to wheat ingestion. To our knowledge, this is the largest series described in this region. The diagnosis of this condition may be delayed due to the heterogeneity of the symptoms and triggers, being necessary a high level of diagnostic suspicion. We report their general characteristics and evolution in time. Results: The median of age was 5 years old (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) at the time of first reaction with cheese. Six patients had anaphylaxis and 2 perioral urticarial immediately after cheese ingestion. Four children had overcome their CM allergy and tolerated regular CM ingestion (except one with partial tolerance). All patients had rhinitis, 7 asthma, 4 atopic dermatitis and 5 other food allergies (nuts, seafood and legumes). The median follow-up time was 5.5 years (6 months to 11 years). Medians of specific IgE to whole CM, CM casein, GM, and SM at the time of diagnosis were 6.3 (0.1-11), 1.29 (0.18-9.74 ), 17 (0.62->100) and 32 (1.88->100) kUA/. Medians SPT to whole CM, CM casein, GM, and SM at the time of diagnosis were 3 (0-6), 2 (0-5), 7 (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) and 7 (4-10) mm. IgE levels to GM and SM remained similar during the follow-up. In 2 patients with positive CM IgE, these levels turned higher after discontinuing CM ingestion and became reactive to CM again. Conclusion: The majority of goat/sheep allergic patients had anaphylaxis. In the follow-up, sIgE to goat and sheep levels remained high despite strict avoidance. Half of our patients have a selective goat or sheep allergy. The other half had previous CM allergy and in two of them their CM tolerance depends on the continue ingestion as happens in patients after CM OIT. Background: Pomegranate is a fruit of the Lythraceae family, native of Middle East and spread through Mediterranean area. Lately its use is more frequent in yoghurts, juices and other products. Allergy to pomegranate has been scarcely reported in the literature. We present a case of allergy to pomegranate. Method: A 15-year-old man, no previous allergies, developed facial angioedema, dysphagia, dysphonia, throat tightness, pruritus and generalised urticaria 30 min after pomegranate intake. Afterwards he did not take this fruit again, but tolerate citrics, banana and rosaceaes. Skin prick test with a battery of common allergens, fruits, nuts, LTP as well as with 1/1 and 1/10 natural pomegranate extract (protein content of the extract measured by Bradford's method was 1.7 mg/ml) and prick-prick with fresh pomegranate was performed. Specific IgE to pomegranate detected by direct ELISA and immunoblotting were performed in the patient's serum and in 10 healthy controls without any allergy history. Results: Skin prick test were positive for artemisia, apple, peach, peanut, sunflower seeds, pea, LTP (Lipid Transfer Protein) and both concentrations of pomegranate and fresh pomegranate prick-prick. Pomegranate prick test with both concentrations were negative in 10 healthy controls. The pomegranate SDS-PAGE showed 6 bands with the following molecular weights: 46, 35, 28, 20, 14 and 9 kDa. Immunoblotting showed a 28 kDa and 9 kDa (probably a LTP) that bound IgE in the sera of the patient. Positive specific IgE to pomegranate was detected by ELISA. Conclusion: We report a IgE mediated allergy to Punica granatum confirmed by in vivo and in vitro tests. Background: Hidden allergens are a severe clinical problem. There were several reports of anaphylactic reaction after ingestion of allergens hidden in a meal, for example peanuts, egg or strawberries. Method: Patient, 55 years old, male, was admitted to perform diagnosis of allergy. In May 2010, after an accidental ingestion of kiwi hidden in vanilla ice cream (it is most likely that a small amount of kiwi fruit was on a spoon used for scooping ice cream) the patient developed shortness of breath, swelling and numbness of tongue, dizziness and temporary loss of consciousness, involuntary urination and defecation. Patient several years earlier, after ingestion of kiwi developed numbness of lips and tongue, and generalised skin urticaria. The patient eliminated kiwi from his diet. Skin prick tests (SPT) were performed with food allergens and were negative. The skin prick test using a standardised kiwi allergen was not performed since the allergen extract was not available. Eventually, we performed a prick-by-prick test with fresh kiwi fruit. The patient also had several immunological tests using enzymatic Hycor Biomedical Technic EIA. Results: The result of the prick by prick test was strongly positive (histamine 4 mm/ 4 mm, negative controlnegative, kiwi 9 mm/12 mm). Ten minutes after the test, the patient experienced severe headache, weakness, rash on the neck and d ecollet e, and shortness of breath. The patients level of specific IgE against kiwi was 2.75 IU/ml (class II). Specific IgE concentration was not elevated to birch, grass pollen, trees, mugwort, house dust mites, molds, mix. spices, banana and latex. Total IgE concentration was 176.42 IU/ml. Conclusion: This case proves that it is very difficult to avoid hidden allergens. Because of a risk of severe anaphylactic reaction in this case, patient was recommended to carry a 'rescue set' (adrenaline, oral steroids, antihistamines). Background: Kounis syndrome has been described as 'the coincidental occurrence of acute coronary syndromes with hypersensitivity reactions involving activation of interrelated and interacting inflammatory cells and including allergic or hypersensitivity and anaphylactic or anaphylactoid insults'. Two variants of this syndrome were proposed, one due to vasospasm of previously healthy coronary vessels, the other due to rupture of atheromatous pla-ques in diseased atheromatous vessels. Recently a third variant was proposed, Kounis syndrome due to stent re-thrombosis in patients with previous stent placement. We present the case of a 58 year old male smoker with a background history of an inferolateral infarct with stent placement in the distal right coronary artery and anterior descendent artery who presented chest tightness, dispnea, dysphagia, pruritis and hives after consuming hazelnuts, olives, anchovies and beer for which he seeked medical assistance at his local General Practitioner who performed an electrocardiogram demosntrating elevation of the ST segment in V2-6 leads which was reverted with sublingual nitroglicerine afterwhich he was sent to the emergency department and was atended by cardiologists who performed a coronary artery angiogram which revealed restenosis of the anterior descendent stent segment and stenosis in the middle coronary artery which was treated with baloon dilatation and stent placement respectively. After being discharged the patient was studies by the allergy department. Method: Prick tests to nuts and anisakis were performed, IgE to nuts, anchovies, anisakis, r Cor a 8, r Cor a 1 and baseline tryptase were measured. Furthermore a bone scan was performed and serum calcium, alkaline phosphatase, beta 2 microglobulin, parathyroid hormone, vitamin b12, vitamin d and folic acid were measured. Results: Prick tests to nuts resulted positive only to hazelnut. IgE to hazelnt, walnut and anisakis were elevated however IgE to major allergens r Cor a 8 and r Cor a 1 were negative. Basal triptase and triptase during the acute fase reaction were elevated leading us to suspect underlying mastocytosis yet to be confirmed. The bone scan and the rest of the blood tests were normal. Conclusion: The patient was diagnosed with Kounis s ındrome type 2-3 and probable mastocytosis due to the consumption of hazelnuts. Male, 38 years old, with a history of seasonal allergic rhinitis mild intermittent, since childhood. January 2011 presents a sudden episode of angioedema (face and hands), generalised urticaria, dysphonia, inspiratory dyspnea, 2 h after the ingestion of milk and honey, resolved in the emer-gency room (ER) after taking corticosteroids EV and antihistamines IM. Similar episode (February 2011), after milk ingestion and taking ibuprofen for sore throat, with subsequent tolerance to NSAIDs. He started partial honey eviction (tolerance to ingestion of honey cake). Third episode (April 2012), 4 h after ingestion of porridge with honey, resolved with self-administration of adrenaline IM. The study revealed blood leucocyte count, serum biochemistry, immunoglobulins, tryptase, complement fractions, b2 microglobulin, thyroid function within the normal range. TASO 373 IU/l; positive antinuclear antibodies. Normal respiratory functional study. Skin prick test showed histamine 4 mm, Artemisia 6 mm, Parietaria 3 mm, D. pteronyssinus 3 mm, L. destructor 3 mm, curry 5 mm, cumin 3 mm, pepper 3 mm, anise 4 mm, carrot negative, cellery negative. The Prick-Prick test showed: honey 10 mm, raw carrot 6 mm, cooked carrot negative, cellery negative. Serum specific IgE: Honey 5.27 kU/l, Artemisia 16.6 kU/l, Parietaria 0.99 kU/l, D. pteronyssinus 0.13, KU/l, L. destructor 0.08 kU/ l, rPru p3 0.06 kU/l, nArt v120.9 kU/l. Food avoidance and therapeutic measures for anaphylaxis were proposed. Immunotherapy to Artemisia was started in September 2012. In June 2013, presented dysphonia, immediately after ingestion of lemon sorbet (including carrots and honey), resolved with oral corticosteroids, without recourse to the ER. Refers tolerance to carrot. Conclusion: Allergy to honey is a rare entity and can manifest with different severity of reactions, including anaphylaxis. The main allergen responsible for allergy honey are proteins derived from glandular secretions of bees and/or certain pollens, particularly Compositae. In this case, it is assumed that the contamination of honey by pollen of Artemisia conditioned the clinical outcome. Casr report: A 41-year-old man presented with pruritus, generalised urticaria, lip edema, hoarseness and dyspnea, within 20 min of eating a complex food (paella with chicken, lima bean and vegetables), he required emergency room assistance, with improvement after administration of Polaramine â , Urbason â and adrenaline. The patient has tolerated foods involved except legumes. He did not report any previous symptoms after eating legumes. The patient had a previous history of allergy due to pollens. Skin prick tests (SPTs) to a common aeroallergens, commercial foods, date palm profiline, peach (Pru p 3, 30 g/mL) extracts, and suspected foods were performed. Serum specific IgE (sIgE) were analyzed by ImmunoCAP, microarray tecqnique (112 component-resolved diagnostics) and SDS-PAGE Immunoblotting. Result: The SPTs were positive to commercial legumes extracts (beans 8 mm, chickpea 4 mm, pea 4 mm, lentil 5 mm), raw and boiled lima bean (14 mm and 20 mm), lentil (13 mm) and chikpea (6 mm). Specific IgE to legumes was as follows: white bean 0.89 kU/l, pea 0.30 kU/l, lentil 0.18 kU/l, Soya bean 0.37 kU/l, chickpea 0.22 kU/l, green bean 0.06 kU/l, lima bean 0.08 kU/l; total IgE 274 IU/ml The microarrays was positive to pollen allergens (nCup a1, nCyn d1, rPhl p1, rPhl p2, nOle e1, rPLa a 1, nPla a 2, nSal k1). SDS-PAGE immunoblotting showed IgEbinding bands of 18, 20 and 30 kD, in raw lima bean extracts. Conclusion: The lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus) is a legume that is one of the ingredients of Valencian paella, a dish widely consumed in Spain. The temporal relationship between exposure and development of symptoms, the positive SPTs and IgE-binding bands on the immunoblotting suggest the lima bean as responsible allergen. To our best knowledge, no cases of lima bean anaphylaxis have been reported in adults. A severe allergic reaction to kiwi Sanchez-Gonzalez, M-J; Barbarroja-Escudero, J; Antol ın-Am erigo, D; Rodriguez-Rodriguez, M; Alvarez de Mon, M Hospital Universitario Pr ıncipe de Asturias, Allergy, Alcal a de Henares, Spain Background: Kounis syndrome is a rare condition, defined as a group of symptoms of unstablevasospastic or nonvasospactic angina and even as acute myocardial infarction. It iselicited by the release of inflammatory mediators secondary to an allergic reaction. There are three variants of Kounis syndrome. Type I: without coronary disease orpredisposing factors. Type II: with coronary disease and/or quiescent preexisting atheromatous disease. Type III: coronary disease and drugeluting stent thrombosis. Method: A 47-year old man, with cardiovascular risk factors (smoker, drinker and diabetes mellitus) and no medical history of atopic diseases. Two min after eating a kiwi he had a generalised maculopapular erythematous rash, facial swelling, vomiting, dyspnoea, low level of consciousness and hypotension. The EKG showed ST segment elevation in aVR, as well as depression in V5-V6 and there was elevation of the cardiac enzymes levels (CPK and troponin). He was treated with adrenaline, hydrocortisone, dexchlorpheniramine and methylprednisolone. He was hospitalised. After treatment the patient had a normal EKG and the cardiac markers returned to normal levels. After being discharged the patient tolerated contact with latex as well as the ingestion of food containing hevein or hevein-like proteins. Results: The patient had positive skin prick and prick-by-prick tests for kiwi. The specific IgE for kiwi was 9.29 kU/l, the total IgE 142 UI/ml. The triptase level was 96.7 mcg/l 5 h after the reaction and 5 mcg/l 48 h later. Conclusion: We present a case of Kounis syndrome corresponding to the type II variant. We should have in mind a possible allergic cause when a patient suffers from angina and myocardial infarction, irrespective of being atopic or not. Background: Anaphylactic reaction after ingestion of Aubergine is rare in European countries. There are several IgE-binding proteins (26-71 kD) in the pulp and peel of Aubergine. What is important a lipid transfer protein (LTP) has been also detected, which may result in cross-reactivity with other LTPcontaining foods. Method: Twenty-seven year old male, previously healthy, in November 2013 experienced anaphilactic reaction in a form of generalised urticaria, swelling of the tongue and dyspnea several minutes after ingestion of cooked Aubergine. Patient was admitted to the Emergency Department of local hospital and was administered with systemic steroids and antihistamine drugs. During diagnosis patient had prick by prick test with fresh and cooked Aubergine pulp and peel, skin prick test with inhaled and food allergens using a set from Allergopharma. We also estimeted the level of and specific IgE using enzymatic Hycor Biomedical Technic EIA (WHO standard results are shown in kU/l) and Immuno-CAP ISAC test to perform componentresolved diagnosis (CRD). Results: Patient had positive prick by prick test with fresh Aubergine pulp (30/50 mm, Histamine 4/4 mm) and cooked Aubergine pulp (8/30 mm) and peel (4/20 mm), positive SPT to cat and grass. The level of specific IgE was elevated against cat (6/17 mm) and grass (10/22 mm) allergens. The level of total IgE 35, 20. ImmunoCAP ISAC test demonstrated elevated level of specific IgE against lipid transfer proteins (nsLTP) against peach rPru p 3 0,6 ISU-E, walnut nJug r3 0,5 ISU-E and plane-tree rPla a 3 1,3 ISU-E. Conclusion: Prick by prick tests were useful in objective confirmation of the source of symptoms. Based on ImmunoCap result it may be suspected, that in the case of this patient there is a high risk of cross reactivity with lipid transfer proteine. Anaphylaxis to green beans mediated by PR-10 proteins? Background: Allergy to PR-10 proteins is usually associated with mild clinical manifestations and is typical of Northern Europe. We report a case of a 54 years old male that suffered three anaphylactic reactions after ingestion of raw apple. This reaction subsequently repeated with green beans and almonds. No other influencing cofactors were known. This patient always lived and worked in Portugal. Methods: Skin Prick Test (SPT) to commercial extracts from aeroallergens and foods, prick-to-prick test (PP) and serum specific IgE determinations (sIgE) were performed. The molecular mass of the IgE binding bands was estimated by means of SDS-PAGE immunoblotting. Immunoblotting inhibition assay using green beans as solid phase and the extracts from apple and birch pollen as inhibitors was performed. Results: SPT (results shown in mm) were positive to birch 9, apple 4; profilin 4 and negative to green-beans and Pru p 3. PP (mm) reveals to be positive to apple (peel 14; pulp 9) and green-bean (raw 10; cooked 5). Blood tests performed shown a total IgE of 101 UI/ml and positive sIgE (kU/l) to birch 6.31; apple 0.53; Bet v1 11.5 and Gly m4 4.12 and negative to green-bean and Pru p3. The SDS-PAGE Immunoblotting demonstrated an IgE binding band of 17 kDa to birch, apple and green-bean extracts. Immunoblotting inhibition assay showed total IgE binding inhibition on the 17-kDa green bean protein when extracts from apple and birch pollen were used as inhibitors. Conclusion: The initial analysis seems to suggest LTP sensitisation. However, sensitisation to birch and to the PR-10 Bet v1protein was confirmed. Moreover, the results obtained demonstrate that the patient had specific IgE that recognise proteins of molecular mass of 17-kDa in extracts of green-bean, apple and birch. Immunoblotting inhibition studies suggest that green-bean IgE binding band probably belongs to the group of Bet v 1 homologous proteins. Also noteworthy is the severity of the symptoms and the sensitisation to Gly m4, previously identified as a PR-10 protein and a severity marker in soy food allergy. Poster Session Group I -Blue TPS 6 -Asthma biomarkers 520 Increased serum thymus and activationregulated chemokine (TARC) and macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC) levels in 6 year-old children with eczema are related to disease severity Background: Serum TARC and MDC levels have been shown to be higher in children with atopic dermatitis. However, most of those studies have been small and TARC and MDC levels vary with age. The aim of the study was to compare serum TARC and MDC levels in 6 year-old children with and without eczema. Method: Serum TARC and MDC levels were determined by ELISA in 85 children with, and 207 children without eczema at age 6 years and related to severity (SCO-RAD ≥10) in the eczema group. Results: Serum TARC and MDC levels were significantly higher in children with eczema. Geometric mean (95% confidence interval) for serum TARC was 469.8 pg/ml (404. 1-546.2) in children with eczema compared to 345.4 pg/ml (319.3-373.7) in children without eczema (P = 0.0005). Comparatively, geometric mean serum MDC levels were 1057. 1 pg/ml (994.8-1123.4 ) in children with eczema compared to 940.0 pg/ml (908.8-972.3) in children without eczema (P = 0.0005). In children with eczema, those having a SCORAD of ≥10, also had significantly higher serum TARC and MDC levels. Conclusion: The serum CCR4 ligands, TARC and MDC, are significantly higher in 6 year-old children with eczema and are related to disease severity. These ligands may be of use for assessing eczema severity. IL-33 and regulated and normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) in BAL fluid in asthma patients without cigarette smoking Background: Inflammatory cytokines and chemokines have been reported to play important roles in the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma. However, no criteria for the classification of 'smoker' and 'atopic' in bronchial asthma have been defined. In this study, we compared the levels of several cytokines found in the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid of patients classified as having bronchial asthma. Methods: Cell subpopulations in BAL fluid were counted. BAL fluid levels of in IL-4, -5, -13, -17, and -33 and regulated and normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) were measured using a bead suspension array in 36 asthma patients (13 males, 23 females; mean age, 39.53 years) who had never smoked, 18 asthma patients (11 males, 7 females; mean age, 30.67 years) who were ex or current smokers (Brinkman index (BI): 1-399), and 10 asthma patients (9 males, 1 female; mean age, 50.2 years) who were current heavy smokers (BI: above 400). Relationships were assessed by Spearman's rank correlation analysis. Results: The number of lymphocytes in BAL cell subpopulations of never smokers were significantly higher than those of heavy smokers. The number of neutrophils was significantly higher in heavy smokers than in never smokers. Levels of IL-33 and RANTES were significantly higher in never smokers than in heavy smokers. In addition, the levels of IL-33 and RANTES in never smokers were significantly higher in atopic asthma patients than in non-atopic asthma patients. A good correlation was noted between RANTES and lymphocytes or IL-33 in atopic asthma patients who were never smokers. Conclusions: Differences in the cell types of BAL fluid, as well as in the levels of IL-33 and RANTES in asthma patients with or without smoking, might reflect pathogenesis. Bakground: Exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) is a validated marker of airway inflammation in asthma. The role of FeNO as a decision-aid to step down inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) has been limitedly studied. Therefore we investigated the value of baseline FeNO or change in FeNO for predicting asthma control worsening in a post-hoc analysis of a database that included subjects with asthma where step down ICS dose was decided on clinical basis. Methods: FeNO and asthma control (assessed by means of ACQ) were measured in 143 patients at baseline and 149 days (IQR 70-293 days) after downtitrating ICS from 1000 to 500 lg beclomethasone equivalents (BclEq). Results: A total of 82 subjects had normal (< 25 ppb) baseline levels of FeNO and 61 subjects had intermediate levels of . Both groups had similar baseline ACQ (P = 0.13) and decrease of ICS dose (P = 0.93) and similar proportion of subjects who deteriorated with at least 0. Background: Epidemiological studies have suggested an association between maternal vitamin D dietary intake during pregnancy and risk of asthma and allergy in the offspring. However, prospective clinical studies on vitamin D measured in cord blood and development of clinical end-points are sparse. The objective of this study was to investigate the interdependence of cord blood 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)-Vitamin D) level and investigator-diagnosed asthma-and allergy-related conditions during preschool-age. Method: Cord blood 25(OH)-Vitamin D level was measured in 257 children from the Copenhagen Prospective Study on Asthma in Childhood (COPSAC 2000 ) atrisk mother-child cohort. Troublesome lung symptoms (TROLS), asthma, respiratory infections, allergic rhinitis, and eczema, at age 0-7 years were diagnosed exclusively by the COPSAC pediatricians strictly adhering to predefined algorithms. Objective assessments of lung function and sensitisation were performed repeatedly from birth. Results: After adjusting for season of birth, deficient cord blood 25(OH)-Vitamin D level (≤50 nmol/l) was associated with a 2.7-fold increased risk of recurrent TROLS (HR = 2.65; 95% CI = 1.02-6.86), but showed no association with respiratory infections or asthma. We saw no association between cord blood 25(OH)-Vitamin D level and lung function, sensitisation, rhinitis or eczema. The effects were unaffected from adjusting for multiple lifestyle factors. Conclusion: Fetal 25(OH)-Vitamin D deficiency associated with increased risk of recurrent asthma-like symptoms till age 7 years. Randomized controlled trials of vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy are needed to prove causality. 525 Elevated serum IL-33 levels in asthma patients, especially in steroid responsive asthmatics Background: Interleukin (IL)-33 is newly discovered IL-1 family cytokine, and recent studies revealed that IL-33 enhanced allergic inflammation. In this study, we investigated the association between serum IL-33 levels and asthma. Method: A total of 104 patients with asthma and 50 healthy controls were enrolled. Serum IL-33 levels were measured by a specific sandwich ELISA. Results: Asthma patients had higher IL-33 levels than the normal controls (3.458 (0.791-5.945) vs 0.282 (0.000-2.507) ng/ mL, P = 0.000). Among asthmatics, steroid responsive patients (n = 20) showed higher levels of serum IL-33 than those of steroid nonresponsive patients (n = 14) (5.758 (3.992-8.794 ) vs 3.458 (1.924-5.531 ) ng/ mL, P = 0.009). However, there were no statistical significance between severe and mild asthma (2.678 (0.000-4.857) vs 3.242 (0.000-3.985) ng/mL, P = 0.811), and neutrophilic and eosinophilic asthma (3.032 (0.000-4.077) vs 2.449 (0.000-4.857) ng/m, P = 0.871). Conclusion: Serum IL-33 levels were elevated in asthma, especially in steroid responsive patients. Differences in the effect of salmeterol/ fluticasone combination therapy on exhaled breath components between smokers and nonsmokers with asthma Background: It has been demonstrated that smoking asthmatics benefit less from inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) treatment than never-smoking asthmatics. Less information is available, however, on differences in the effect of ICS/lABA combination therapy on airway inflammation between smokers and nonsmokers with asthma. The aim of this study was to identify differ-ences in the effect of salmeterol/fluticasone propionate (SM/FP) combination therapy on exhaled markers of airway inflammation between smokers and nonsmokers with asthma. Method: Bronchial nitric oxide (J'aw NO ), alveolar nitric oxide (CA NO ) and exhaled breath condensate (EBC) pH were measured at baseline and after 6 weeks of treatment with SM/FP (50/250 mcg) twice a day in 22 current smokers and 22 nonsmokers with asthma. Exhaled NO was measured at multiple flux (100, 200 and 300 ml/s); CA NO was adjusted using the Condorelli method. EBC pH was measured after deaeration of the sample with argon for 8 min. Results: Treatment with SM/FP was associated with a significant decrease in J'awNO values only in the group of nonsmokers (P < 0.05). Furthermore, the SM/ FP-induced decrease in J'awNO was significantly greater in nonsmokers than in smokers, the mean difference in the change between the groups being 1903 pl/s (95% CI, 234-3572, P = 0.03). Treatmentinduced changes in CA NO and EBC pH were similar in the two groups. Conclusion: Our results suggest that antiinflammatory effects of SM/FP combination therapy are significantly greater in nonsmokers than in smokers with asthma. However, these findings may be explained, at least in part, by differences in baseline nitric oxide values between the two groups studied. polymorphism of TLR-4 (Asp299Gly) was detected by PCR. The exact Fisher test was used to determine the distribution of genotypes according to the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Odds ratio (OR) was calculated by using logistic regression. Patients and volunteers provided written informed consent for the genetic study. Results: In atopic asthma patients the AA genotype was detected in 210 patients, AG in 61 and GG in 4; in non-atopic asthma AA in 51, AG in 5, GG in 0; and in controls group AA in 242, AG in 40, and GG in 3. The allele frequencies were 87% (n = 481) for the A allele and 13% (n = 69) for the G allele in the atopic asthma, 96% (n = 107) for the A allele and 4% (n = 5) for the G allele in the nonatopic asthma and 92% (n = 524) for the A allele and 8% (n = 46) for the G allele in the controls. The risk of asthma was significantly higher in atopic patients who carry the G allele (OR = 1.634, C.I. = [1.103-2.421] , v 2 = 6.08, P = 0.014) but was not increased in non-atopic asthma (OR = 0.532, C.I. = [0.207-1.371], v 2 = 1.76, P = 0.18). Conclusion: The TLR-4 (Asp299Gly) polymorphism is associated with adult atopic asthma in the Ukrainian population. New perspectives on exhaled breath temperature assessment of allergic and respiratory disease states Background: Exhaled breath temperature (EBT) assessment has been proposed as a surrogate marker of airway inflammation before the turn of the last century. Since then, numerous studies have been done. This investigation aims to identify and analyze the literature to date related to this technology and fully apprise the use of EBT assessment in allergic and respiratory diseases. Methods: A search was done using the MEDLINE database employing keywords 'exhaled breath temperature' OR 'temperature of exhaled air' AND 'asthma' OR 'COPD' OR chronic lung disease'. Abstracts presented at international meetings of allergy, asthma and respiratory diseases mentioning 'exhaled breath temperature' were reviewed as were all publications in peer-reviewed journals utilising 'exhaled breath temperature' assessments. Results: This project included 33 studies. Fifteen studies were published in peerreviewed journals and 17 studies were presented at international meetings in Europe and North America. Although the number of subjects recruited into the individual studies were small, the overall number of studied subjects was 2885 having diverse respiratory conditions. Associations of EBT with a variety of other indices of respiratory diseases were noted including spirometry (33 studies), symptom scores (6 studies), fractional exhaled nitric oxide (5 studies), quality of life (4 studies), sputum cells (4 studies), airway responsiveness (3 studies), daily peak expiratory flow (2 studies), airway remodeling (1 study) and bronchial blood flow (1 study) and air trapping in patients with small airway involvement (1 study). EBT seams to reflect 2 different processes acting in opposing directions with the resulting vector shaping an individual pattern in subjects with various disease states. EBT does not duplicate oral or auricular temperature but rather gives insight into a different aspect of respiratory physiology heretofore not captured by any other means. Conclusion: EBT determination has the potential to serve as a novel marker for assessment of the state of the airways in respiratory disease, including both allergic inflammation and non-allergic inflammatory processes when used either alone or in combination with other parameters as an index measuring inflammation and assessing respiratory physiology. Biomarkers in exhaled breath condensate in children with well controlled asthma Bani c, I 1 ; Zivkovi c, J 1 ; Bulat Lokas, S 1 ; Lipej, M 1 ; Plavec, D 1 ; Turkalj, M 1 1 Children's Hospital Srebrnjak, Zagreb, Croatia Background: Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) analysis is a non-invasive method for evaluation of a wide range of molecules from the respiratory tract, facilitating the understanding of pathways propagating airway inflammation. High urate levels in EBC may be a marker of oxidative stress and pH of EBC has been found to be lower in many respiratory disorders. Aiming at better understanding of asthma control, we examined their levels in EBCs from children with asthma and children in remission. Method: EBCs were collected from 96 children, aged 5-18 years. Subjects were divided into 4 groups: children with poorly controlled asthma (n = 22); children with well controlled asthma (n = 22); children with asthma in remission (n = 7); non-asth-matic children (n = 51). Urate level and pH, as well as urea level as normalisation factor, were measured in EBCs. Results: Urea and pH levels in EBC did not differ among different subject groups. Urate levels in EBC were lower in children with well controlled asthma and children with asthma in remission compared to children with poorly controlled asthma, and in children with well controlled asthma compared to non-asthmatic children. Conclusion: Urate level in EBC is a potential biomarker of good asthma control, as well as remission of asthma in children. Serum ferritin levels are associated with asthma and wheeze in preadolescents Background: Iron is required for numerous biological functions, including hematopoiesis, but it also promotes oxidative stress. In plasma, iron is usually bound by transferrin whereas, intracellularly, it is reserved as ferritin. Ferritin can also be found in serum: this marker correlates closely with iron stores and is often used as an index of iron deficiency, alongside Transferin Saturation (TS). Both transferrin and serum ferritin (which is also an acute phase reactant), can exert antioxidant action by binding free iron. Nevertheless, to date, evidence of a potential correlation of these markers of oxidative stress with asthma, is scarce. Methods: Wheeze in the last 12 months (current), wheeze ever, physician-diagnosed asthma and perinatal data were recorded from questionnaires filled in by the parents of 1808 Greek children aged 9-13. Serum ferritin, serum free iron and TS were measured from blood samples. Logistic regression analyses were performed with the wheeze/asthma variables as main outcomes. A two-tailed p value of < 0.05, was considered statistically significant. Results: Serum ferritin correlated with physician-diagnosed asthma (OR = 1.13, 95%CI = 1.00-1.28, P = 0.04) and current wheeze (OR = 1.30, 95%CI = 1.08-1.56, P = 0.004) but not with ever wheeze (P > 0.05), after adjustment for a wide array of potential confounding factors (serum iron, Mean Corpuscular Volume, hemoglobin, maternal prenatal smoking, method of delivery, birth weight, gender, parity, breastfeeding, parental educational level, passive smoking at home, current BMI/waist circumference, mother occupation and people involved in daily childcare). Serum free iron and TS were not associated with any of the outcomes, either before or after adjustment (P > 0.05). Conclusions: Serum ferritin appears to be positively associated with asthma, albeit not through an effect on free iron or ironmediated hematopoiesis. The properties of serum ferritin as an acute phase reactant could be relevant to this association. The role of adhesion molecules in bronchial asthma in children Panahova, TT Children Diseases, Azerbaijan Medical University, Baku, Azerbaijan The antigens of adhesion play an important role in immune-mediated stages of the inflammation. The main function of adhesion molecules is to maintain intercellular interactions, cell migration into inflammatory nidus and in initiation of the immune response. The driving mechanism of immunomodulatory action of the soluble forms of membrane antigens includes binding of ligand and preventing its interaction with the membrane form of the antigen, the function of trans-signaling, participation in regulation of immune responses. The role of adhesion molecules in the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma (BA) is being actively studied. The aim of this study was to determine the level of soluble antigen CD54 (ICAM-1) in patients with asthma of varying severity. Materials and methods: In 71 patients with atopic asthma in age from 3 to 18 years in the acute stage were determined in serum _ ICAM-1. The patients were divided into 3 groups: group 1 -9 patients with mild degree of disease, group 2 -49 patients with an average degree, group 3 -13 patients with severe disease. Results and discussion: Patients joining the 2 and 3rd group, there was marked tendency towards increased serum levels of antigens CD54 (ICAM-1). The significant increase in the said indicators as compared to the norm and with those of the 1st and 2nd groups, there was revealed only a severe form of the disease (P < 0.001). The average level of CD54 (ICAM-1) in children with an easy course was 292.54 AE 86 pg/ml at a rate of 230.3 AE 47.4 pg/ml. The level of _ ICAM-1 in children with mild course was determined as 209.0 AE 10.6 pg/ml. and do not differ from normal indices. There was observed in the children with moderate course of disease tending towards increase of the level of _ ICAM-1 and the figure was 290.8 AE 8.9 pg/ml. There was found out that the higher levels of _ ICAM-1 was observed in patients with severe course representing 353.1 AE 15.0 pg/ml. The high serum concentration of soluble antigens ICAM-1 may be a link in asthma with the restriction mechanism aimed at braking of accurate migration of inflammatory cells into the body in shock and reduction, so the inflamed process. Thus, the increase of the level of CD54 (ICAM-1) in serum with an increase in the severity of disease can act as an indicator of the severity of asthma and is related to markers of allergic inflammation. Background: Blood eosinophil (B-Eos) count is commonly increased in asthma and relate to asthma symptoms and exacerbations. Fraction of exhaled nitric oxide (Fe NO ) is a marker of airways inflammation and alveolar nitric oxide (Calv NO ) is believed to reflect peripheral airways inflammation. Little is known about the relationship between systemic inflammation and functional airway parameters. We aimed to study how airways inflammation estimated by Fe NO and Calv NO , and lung function measured by forced oscillation technique (FOT) and spirometry, relate to B-Eos in asthma. Method: In 53 asthmatic subjects (27 women), aged 16-38 years, B-Eos, Fe NO , trumpet model and axial diffusion adjusted (TMAD-adj) Calv NO , inspiratory airway resistance at 5 Hz (R 5insp ), 19 Hz (R 19insp ) and reactance at 5 Hz (X 5insp ) by FOT and FEV 1 , FEV 1 /FVC and MEF 50 were assessed. B-Eos count ≥0.3 9 10 9 /l was considered elevated. Results: Subjects with elevated B-Eos count (n = 23) had higher Fe NO (median (IQR)) (41.2 ppb (23.2-79.7)) compared to subjects with normal B-Eos count (n = 30) (13.6 ppb (10.6-18.4)), P < 0.001, whereas no difference in TMAD-adj Calv NO was found (P = 0.43). R 5 insp was higher in subjects with elevated B-Eos count (123.6% (105.7-147.6) vs 99.5% (79.9-121.9)), (P = 0.02) and the same was found for R 19 insp (130.4% (113.0-137.3) vs 94.5% (75. 2-123. 3)) (P = 0.01). No differences in X 5insp (P = 0.59), FEV 1 (%pred) (P = 0.25), FEV 1 /FVC-ratio (P = 0.37) or MEF 50 (%pred) (P = 0.29) were found. No significant difference in gender, age, height or daily dose of inhaled corticosteroids was found between subjects with normal and elevated B-Eos count. Conclusion: Asthmatic individuals with elevated blood eosinophil count have more airway inflammation and airway obstruction compared to asthmatic individuals with normal blood eosinophil levels. Furthermore, airways resistance assessed by forced oscillation technique appears to be a more sensitive measurement than spirometry to detect airway obstruction. Relationship of flow-independent parameters of exhaled nitric oxide (eNO) to clinical assessment of asthma control in children with persistent atopic asthma Background: A limited number of clinical studies examined to what extent the flowindependent eNO parameters (FIeNO) help to assess asthma control in children and adolescents with atopic asthma currently taking inhaled corticosteroids as controller medication. This prospective study aimed to evaluate the relationship between the guideline-based clinical assessment of asthma control, Asthma Control Test questionnaire (ACT), and FIeNO. Method: Patients and their parents were asked to complete the ACT. Thereafter, the level of asthma control was classified by the physician with the help of GINA guidelines and patients were stratified into the groups A/with well-controlled (n = 63, age: 8.5-19 year) and B/not well-controlled (n = 28, age: 5.7-19 year) asthma. Moreover, the group C was studied of patients with allergic rhinitis and no history of asthma (n = 46, age: 6.6-18 year). Measurements of eNO were performed at the epiratory flow rates of 30, 50 (FENO 50 ), 150, and 250 mL/s using chemiluminescence according to international recommendations, and FIeNO parameters were calculated using a nonlinear iterative method. Results: Patients in the group B as compared to A and C had higher FENO 50 (medians of 66 vs 33 vs 23 ppb, P < 0.001) and bronchial flux of NO (J awNO , medians of 4170 vs 1810 vs 1620 pL/s, P < 0.001), whereas the results were comparable in the two latter groups. The corrected alveolar NO concentration (C alvNO ) and FEV 1 values were comparable in all groups. Group A self-reported a better asthma control: median (range) ACT was 23.9 (19-25) as compared to 19.7 (15-24) in the group B (P < 0.001). ROC curves for measurements of FENO 50 and J awNO in the diagnosis of not-well controlled asthma were characterised by the areas under the curve of 0.70 (95%CI 0.63-0.76) and 0.71 (0.64-0.78), whereas the diagnostic value of ACT was higher as documented by the area of 0.89 (0.84-0.95). Conclusion: C alvNO is of no value, and J awNO and FENO 50 are of limited value, whereas ACT score is a valid tool for asthma control assessment in children and adolescents with atopic asthma treated with inhaled corticosteroids. (This work was supported by the Charles University grant no P37/05, Prvouk). >50 ppb/>35 ppb in patients aged ≥12/< 12 respectively). Results: A total of 304 patients had received no ICS therapy in the year prior to their FeNO assessment. Of these patients, 128 (42%) initiated ICS at/within a month of assessment. The majority of patients (82%) with a high FeNO level (who had not received ICS in the year prior to assessment) were initiated on ICS while 46% of those with intermediate levels and 26% of patients with low/normal levels (who had not received ICS in the year prior to assessment) were initiated on ICS at/within the first month of assessment. Conclusion: Patients with raised FeNO levels were more likely than those with low FeNO levels to be started on ICS at/within the first month of assessment. These data suggest prescribers are using FeNO level to guide ICS initiation decisions (identified by NICE as a potential role for FeNO in asthma management). These findings are the basis for a new community-based study of 290 UK patients, designed to further evaluate the potential utility of FeNO assessment in patients with non-specific respiratory symptoms. Background: Several factors are known to cause asthma exacerbation but upper respiratory infection and exposure to aeroallergens are thought be the most common cause. In our study, we compared seasonal difference in aeroallergen antibody titer and laboratory data between acute asthma exacerbation in fall and non-fall. Methods: Study included 36 patients who visited Seoul St. Mary's Hospital emergency department for mild to moderate asthma exacerbation between Sept 22, 2008 and Nov 8, 2010 . We defined fall group as patients who visited emergency department in Sept, Oct, Nov and the rest were defined as non-fall group. We compared the clinical features, allergen specific IgE, cytokine, total IgE, eosinophilic cationic protein between fall group and non-fall group. Results: Twenty-eight patients were included in fall group and 8 were non-fall group. Within the fall group, 14 (50%) vis-ited emergency department in October. Mean age of fall group was 6.0 and 15 (58.3%) were male. Mean age of non-fall group was 5.6 and 6 (75.0%) were male. Total IgE was significantly higher in fall group; 787 IU/ml in fall group and 247 IU/ml in non-fall group. Antibody titer for Dermatophagoides farinae was 50.9 kU A /l and 11.9 kU A /l in fall group and non-fall group respectively. Antibody titer for Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus was 126.4 kU A /l and 27.1 kU A /l in fall group and non-fall group. Fall group showed significantly higher titers for house dust mite. Proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1b, IL-2, IL-6, G-CSF showed no significant difference between 2 groups. Antiviral cytokines such as IP-10 and IFNc showed no difference. Conclusion: We found that in Korea, asthma exacerbation occurs most commonly in October. We also found that atopic tendency and sensitisation to house dust mite plays an important role in asthma exacerbation rather than viral infection as previously thought. However, further study will be needed to clarify why such difference occurred. Background: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe bronchial asthma (BA) often share inflammatory features, including autoimmunity. We aimed to reveal if the serum assessment of IgG4/ IgE-auto Abs to lung tissue Ags in cohorts of patients with COPD and BA could be applied in clinical and immunological disease monitoring. Method: We measured PHA-induced production of IL-4, IL-8 IL-10, IL-17, TGF-b by blood mononuclear cells and the induced sputum samples, obtained from 86 patients with coexistence of moderate/ severe COPD and BA (GOLD stage III/ IV) compared with 34 atopic BA and 20 healthy controls. IgG4-and IgE Abs to human lung elastin, collagen III and myosin were detected by quantitative modified ELISA. Results: Patients with combined COPD and BA in 69% of cases revealed significantly higher levels of IgE Abs to myosin (4.1 AE 0.3 IU/ml) vs atopic BA (2.3 AE 0.053 IU/ml) and had oppositely lower rate (21%) and levels of IgG4-Abs to myosin, elastin and collagen III as compared with BA (P < 0.05). IgG4 autoAbs among con-trols were not been detected. The group of COPD/BA patients, positive for IgG4-autoAbs showed higher production of IL-8 vs IgG4-negative subjects (P < 0.001). IgG4-positivity was associated with enhanced sputum levels of a profibrotic cytokine TGF-b and IL-4 only in atopic BA. Seventy pecent of patients within COPD/BA group had emphysema and showed predominance of IgE Abs with lower IgG4 Abs to collagen III and myosin (P = 0.006). Obesity (BMI ≤ 30 kg/m 2 ) was observed in 60% of cases and was independently associated with enhanced production of IL-17 and higher levels of antielastin IgG4 Abs (r = 0.87). The level of serum leptin increased in BA vs COPD independently from BMI and was higher among patients, positive for antielastin IgG4 Abs (P < 0.001). Conclusion: The detection of IgG4/IgE Abs profile to lung elastin, collagen and myosin could be considered for further trials in monitoring of COPD patients, especially with combined BA and obese phenotype. Background: Previous studies have shown that proteasomes are involved in pathogenesis of different diseases. It is thought that proteasomal genes which encode proteasomes are important in development of asthma and its phenotypes. We aimed to compare proteasomal genes (PSMA6, PSMC6 and PASMA3) diversity between patients with allergic and non-allergic asthma. Method: One hundred and six subjects with asthma (71 patients with allergic asthma and 35 with non-allergic asthma), diagnosed according to the recommendations of Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) were enrolled to the study. Sensitivity to standard allergens was evaluated using skin prick test. Alleles and genotypes of PSMA6 (rs1048990 and rs2277460), PSMC6 (rs2295827 and rs2295827) and PSMA3 (rs2348071) were evaluated using allele specific amplification and cleaved amplified polymorphic sequence methods. DNA from peripheral blood was extracted using Qiagen (Germany) DNA blood mini kit standardised protocol. Results: Prevalence of studied genes polymorphism in patients with allergic and non-allergic asthma was found as following: PSMA6 (rs1048990) Background: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a complex polygenic disorder of the nasal mucosa with strong heritability component. T helper 1 cytokines play critical and various roles in allergic response against allergens and their genes are located in previously reported susceptibility loci for AR. Therefore, in this case-control study, we evaluated associations of 4 common genetic polymorphisms of interleukin 2 (IL-2), interleukin 12 (IL-12) and interferon gamma (IFN-c) with AR. Method: In this study, 98 patients with AR diagnosed according to modified allergic rhinitis criteria in the 'Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma' (m-ARIA) document were enrolled in the study and 139 healthy volunteers with no history of AR and with the same ethnicity of the patient were recruited as the control group. Allele frequencies for two polymorphisms of IL-2 (rs2069762 and rs2069763), one variant in IL-12 gene (rs3212227) and one variant in IFN-c gene (rs2430561) were determined in both groups using PCR sequence-specificprimers method. Results: G allele in rs2069762 of IL-2 and A allele in rs2430561 of IFN-c were more frequent in the patients than in controls. However, there was not any association between allele frequencies of rs2069763 in IL-2 and rs3212227 in IL-12 and susceptibility to allergic rhinitis. In some subgroups of patients, there were significant relationships between IgE levels, eosinophil count, eosinophil percentage and persis-tency of disease and 2 variants in IL-2 and IL-12. Conclusion: We found that genetic variants in IL-2 and IFN-c were associated with susceptibility to AR. These polymorphisms could also affect the clinical parameters and persistency of the disease in some subgroups of the patients. Background: Epidermal growth factor (EGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), AA isoform of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF-AA), BB isoform of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF-BB) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) are involved in the pathogenesis of airway inflammation in asthma. This study investigates the relation between asthmatic phenotype and levels of these mediators in induced sputum and serum. Method: Sixtey-two asthmatic patients were divided into eosinophilic and neutrophilic phenotype by cytological classification in induced sputum; FEV1/FVC% >70% and FEV1/FVC%< 70% by lung function; mild, midrange and severe asthma by asthma severity. And the concentrations of EGF, bFGF, PDGF-AA, PDGF-BB and VEGF in serum and sputum were measured using sandwich enzyme immunoassays. Results: VEGF levels in serum and induced sputum were higher in subjects with eosinophilic phenotype than that of neutrophilic phenotype, in patients with FEV1/FVC%< 70% than that of patients with FEV1/FVC%>70%, in severe asthma than that of mild and midrange asthma. There were no differences of EGF, bFGF, PDGF-AA and PDGF-BB between various phenotypes. Conclusion: Increased VEGF in serum and induced sputum were found in asthmatics with eosinophilic airway inflammation, more severe airflow limitation and asthma severity. Genetics variants of VDR in IPA + Colombian asthmatic preschoolers living a a poor community of the Caribbean coast Introduction: Asthma is a complex disease in where a genetics heterogeneous compenent is involved. There is a few studies of Genetic variants of VDR in admixed Latin-American IPA+ asthmatics preschoolers and none in Colombians. The aims of this study was to look for a association of VDR polymorphisms with asthma characteristics as well as ViT D and IgE serum levels in these Colombian children. Methods: This study included 50 asthmatic preschoolers and 100 healthy controls (3-5 years of age). All of them were not unrelated. This work was approved by de bioethical committee of Health Division of Del Norte University, at Barranquilla Colombia. Levels of serum Ig E and Vit D were determinate by an commercial ELISA assays. Participant children were genotyped for the 4 SNPs: BsmI, Fok I, Taq I and Apa I. VDRs polymorphisms were evaluated by Real time PCR in a thermal cycler Applied Biosystems7500. Results: For the VDR SNPs no statistically significant differences were founds between FokI, ApaI, and TaqI polymorphisms when the IPA (+) wheezing group was compared to control group (P = 0.34, P = 0.93, P = 0.67) respectively. In contrast it was found a statistical significance for BsmI between the studied groups (P = 0.05). There were no significant differences between vitamin D and Ig E levels and the studied polymorphisms in these groups of cases and controls. On the other hand the distribution of allele and genotype frequencies was similar in both groups. Conclusion: Taken together these results it seems that BsmI SNPs may be implicated in asthma susceptibility in this Colombian preschoolers however large population study should be performed in this admixed populations in order to validate our results. Background: Bronchial submucosal fibroblasts have been known as key cells in the pathogenesis of airway remodeling in asthma. However, it is not easy to get these cells through fiberoptic bronchosocoy in asthma patients. The aim of this study is to evaluate cellular characteristics of nasal fibroblasts to mechanical stimuli, and then the usefulness of these cells as a substitute for bronchial mucosal fibroblasts. Method: We enrolled seven patients with various nasal disease requiring paranasal sinus surgery under general anesthesia. One piece of nasal mucosa was obtained from inferior turbinate during surgery. Nasal mucosa was incubated in the 6 well culture plate with medium until plates were fully covered with fibroblasts. After harvesting, cells were stored in nitrogen tank under À20°C. In the experiment, cells were incubated in the culture plate, and then cells were harvested after 48 h. In second group, 24 h after incubation of cells, cells were harvested, and then reincubated for another 24 h. Harvested cells were immunocytochemically stained with a-smooth muscle actin (SMA), and extracellular domain A fibronectin (EDAcFN). Western blotting was also performed using fibroblasts obtained from two different culture conditions. Results: There were statistically significant differences of SMA expressions between two groups (P < 0.05). Fibronectin expression showed a tendency of more expression in mechanically stimulated group than no stimulated group, but there were no statistical significances (P > 0.05). Western blotting of these two proteins showed similar patterns with immunocytochemistry. Conclusion: Nasal fibroblasts showed that these cells can easily transformed to myofibroblasts under mechanical stimuli. We would like to recommend that nasal fibroblasts may be used to as a substitute for bronchial mucosal fibroblasts for the study of airway remodeling associated with mechanical stimuli. Background: Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) modulates the amount of NO that could be related with iNOS polymorphism. The purpose of this study is to analyze the association between iNOS gene polymorphism: + 14C> T (Ex16+14C>T, Ser608Leu; rs 2297518; antisense sequence), with asthma severity when compared with a control group of healthy blood donors. Method: Asthmatic patients (n = 100) compared with a control group (n = 72); the polymorphisms were analyzed by PCR-RFLP (Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism). Control of asthma assessed by validated instrument (ACQ7 and PAQLQ). Statistical analysis performed with PASW version 18 establishing a significance level of P < 0.05. Results: Mean age of 100 asthmatics: 38.1 AE 18.6 years (7-86 years); 65 females and 35 males. Mean age of control-group (n = 72) was 41.68 AE 11.71 years (19-69 years); 25 females and 47 males. In asthmatics the frequencies of Allele C 0.81 and of Allele T 0.19; in controls: 0.92 and 0.08 respectively. There is statistical difference between these groups (P = 0.003). Being the allele T more frequent in asthmatics. Genotypes in the asthmatics-CC: 66%; CT: 30%; TT: 4%; in control group-CC: 86.1%; CT:12.5%; TT: 1.4%. There is statistical difference between these groups (P = 0.010). When we associate genotypes (CC vs CT+TT; P = 0.003), the genotypes who express allele T were more frequent in the asthma-group. The risk (OR) associated is 3.338 (CI 95% [1.524-7.313 ], (P = 0.003). In asthmatics, there is no statistical differences in genotype frequencies (P > 0.05) between: atopics and non atopics; controlled and uncontrolled asthma; males and females; and in the different age-groups. Conclusion: With this results we might conclude that Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) polymorphism (Ex16+14C>T), could be a risk factor for asthma, we also concluded that the genotypes who express the allele T are more prevalent in asthmatics, in this hospitalbased population. Is there any basophil activation in peripheral blood in AERD patients? Mitsui, C; Taniguchi, M; Ono, E; Kajiwara, K; Fukutomi, Y; Higashi, N; Mita, H; Mori, A; Akiyama, K Cinical Research Center for Allergy and Rheumatology, Sagamihara National Hospital, Sagamihara, Japan Background: Cysteinyl leukotriene (cysLT) overproduction is considered as one of the most important mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD). Many studies have shown that eosinophils and mast cells play some important roles in the pathogenesis of AERD. However, there has been no study in which the relevance of basophils, which also release cysLT, to AERD pathogenesis was evaluated. We have explored CD203c expression on basophils from AERD patients in stable condition and its relevance to cysLT overproduction. Methods: We examined 17 AERD patients and 20 ATA patients whose aspirin sensitivity was determined by the aspirin challenge test. We used flow cytometry to compare the spontaneous expression levels of surface markers on basophils from patients with stable asthma and healthy controls (HCs). Longitudinal changes in these expression levels were measured after basophil stimulation by IgE-dependent or IgE-independent (IL3 stimulated) mechanisms and compared with patients' asthma status. Results: The spontaneous CD203c expression level on basophils from AERD patients was similar to those from ATA patients and HCs (p value = 0.198). The level of anti-IgE induced expression of CD203c increased significantly on basophils from ATA patients compared with those from AERD patients and HCs (p value = 0.002). However, there were no significant differences in the level of CD203c expression on IL3-stimulated basophils among the three groups (p value = 0.283). The expression level of CD203c, which is a biomarker of basophil activation, is not elevated in stable AERD patients compared with stable ATA patients. Background: To analyze the association between single nucleotide polymorphism in MPO promoter region of the gene, À463G>A (rs2333227) with asthma severity when compared with a control group of healthy blood donors and its relation with MPO plasma levels. Method: Asthmatic patients (n = 45) were compared with a control group (n = 34); the polymorphisms were analyzed by PCR-RFLP. MPO plasma levels determined by ELISA kit-R&D Systems. Control of asthma assessed by validated instrument (ACQ7 and PAQLQ). Statistical analysis was performed with PASW version 18 establishing a significance level of P < 0.05. Results: We analyze MPO gene polymorphisms and levels in 45 patients and 34 controls, all males. In asthmatics the frequencies of allele A were 52.2% and allele G: 47.8%. In control group, the frequencies of allele A were 28% and for allele G: 72%. There is statistical differences between these groups (P = 0.000); being allele A more frequent in asthmatics and Allele G in controls. Genotypes in asthmatics were: GG: 20%; AG:55.6%; AA: 24.4% and for control group: GG: 53%; AG: 38%; AA: 9%. There is statistical difference between these groups (P = 0.007). The mean MPO levels were more elevated in asthmatics (19.3 AE 23.11 ng/ml) when compared with control group (13 AE 33.37 ng/ml) (P = 0.004). There are differences in MPO levels by genotypes (P = 0.009) in the asthmatics: GG:40.3 AE 37.02 ng/ml; AG:16.5 AE 13.73 ng/ml; AA:18.6 AE 12.95 ng/ml. There are no differences in MPO levels by genotypes (P = 0.176) in the control-group. In asthmatics there is a trend to have differences between allergics and non-allergics (P = 0.05) being the levels in allergics (19.00 AE 22.18 ng/ml) lower than nonallergic (55.20 AE 33.66 ng/ml). There are no differences in MPO levels by age-group (P > 0.05). Conclusion: The frequencies of polymorphism in the MPO promoter region of the gene, À463G>A, and MPO levels, were statistical different between asthmatics and controls. intron 20 (IVS20+524G>A-rs944722); iNOS exon 16: + 14C> T; rs 2297518. Method: Asthmatics (n = 150) and control group (n = 213) for MPO; Asthmatics (n = 151) and control group (n = 171) for iNOS intron 20; Asthmatics (n = 100) and control group (n = 80) for iNOS: exon 16. Results: iNOS: exon 16 There are statistical differences in allele and genotype frequencies (P < 0.05); the genotypes carrying allele T more frequent among asthmatics. When we associate genotypes (CT+TT vs CC; P = 0.003), the genotypes who express allele T were more frequent in the asthmagroup. The risk (OR) associated is 3.051 (CI 95% [1.451-6.386 ], (P = 0.004). iNOS intron 20 there are statistical differences in allele and genotype frequencies (P < 0.05); the genotypes carrying allele G more frequent among asthmatics. When we associated genotype s (GG vs GA+AA; P = 0.000), genotype GG was more frequent in the asthmatics. The risk associated (OR) is 5.034 (CI 95% [2.321-10 .919], (P < 0.001). MPOÀ463G>A there are statistical differences in allele and genotype frequencies (P < 0.05);the genotypes carrying allele A more frequent among asthmatics. When we associated genotypes (AA +GA vs GG; P = 0.000), genotypes who express allele A were more frequent in the asthmatics. The risk associated (OR) is 4.541 (CI 95% [2.792-7.384 ], (P = 0.000). MPO (GA + AA) + Intron20 (GG) when compared with MPO (GG) + Intron 20 (GA +AA):OR 24.107; CI95% (7.561-76.861); P < 0.001. MPO (GA + AA) + Exon 16 (CT + TT) when compared with MPO (GG) + Exon 16 (CC): OR 9.643; CI95% (3.247-28.640); P < 0.001. Intron20 (GG) + Exon 16 (CT + TT) when compared with Intron20 (GA+AA) + Exon 16 (CC) P < 0.05. MPO (GA + AA) + Intron20 (GG) + Exon 16 (CT + TT) when compared with MPO (GG) + Intron 20 (GA +AA) + Exon 16 (CC) P < 0.05. Conclusions: These single nucleotide polymorphisms seems to potentiate their causal relationship with asthma. splicing. Alternative isoform of IL-5 receptor chain alpha is well studied. However there was no data available on alternative spliced variants of IL-5 itself. Therefore the aim of the study was to identify spliced variants of mouse IL-5 in different tissues. Method: Cell suspensions were collected from spleen, blood, thymus and lymph nodes of BALB/c mice. 5 9 10 6 cells were stimulated with 2 lg/ml concanavalin A. Total RNA which was used for cDNA synthesis was obtained from the cells 18 h after stimulation. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed with specific primers at standard conditions. PCR products were separated by 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis after that DNA bands were visualized, extracted from the gel and sequenced. Results: For the identification of mouse IL-5 spliced variants, cDNA from stimulated cells was PCR amplified using specific primers. Forward primer was designed complementary to the start of exon-1 and the reverse primer to the end of the last exon-4. Separation of PCR products using electrophoresis revealed two DNA fragments with different size. Heavy fragment (402 bp) corresponded to full-length mouse IL-5 and consisted of four exons which was confirmed by sequencing. Light DNA fragment was 33 nucleotides smaller (369 bp) and was extracted from the agarose gel. Sequencing of this fragment revealed lacking of exon-2 in mouse IL-5 mRNA. This alternative variant of mRNA was labeled as mIL-5d2. Both variants of mIL-5 were detected in all investigated tissues: spleen, blood, thymus and lymph nodes. Conclusion: The new spliced variant of mouse IL-5 mRNA transcript lacking exon-2 (mIL-5d2) was identified in different tissues. Further studies are required to find out whether mIL-5d2 transcript is translated into protein and to identify it's role in allergic inflammation. Protein kinase c a (PKC a), a member of the PKC family, has been reported to contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma based on the results of the cell culture and animal studies. Our study objectives were to explore the association between the PKCa gene and asthma in adults by a genetic epidemiologic design and SNP genotyping. Methods: In the present study, we recruited 524 asthmatic patients and 524 age and sex-matched community controls, and the controls have no physician-diagnosed asthma or other respiratory diseases. Three tagSNPs (rs3764402 T > C, rs17633401 T > C, rs4520871 T > C) for PKCa were selected from HapMap. Result: The asthmatic patients had higher IgE levels and lower predicted values of FEV1 (%, pred) and FVC (%, pred). There were also significantly higher frequencies of obesity, smoking, owning pets, and the habit of incense burning in cases than in controls. We observed that the rs4520871 CC/CT genotype significantly increased the risk of asthma (TT vs CC/ CT, adjusted OR = 1.567, 1.037-2.370). We used stratification analysis to clarify the interaction between obesity and genotypes on asthma. After adjusting for age, sex, smoking, pet ownership, incense burning, and IgE levels, subjects with the PKC a rs4520871 TT genotype and normal WHR had a higher OR (1.660, 95% CI = 1.038-2.653) than subjects with the CC/CT genotype and normal WHR. It also modifies the association between obesity and asthma, although the interaction effect is not significant. Conclusion: The rs4520871 genotype is significantly related to adult asthma, and this finding could provide a way to predict the risk of developing asthma. Background: Atopic bronchial asthma (ABA) is the most frequent disease of respiratory organs in children. The goal of therapy for ABA of any stage is achieving control over the disease. Allergic reactions are being developed under direct participation of different cytokines. The aim of this study was to investigate the main indices of humoral and cellular immunity, the levels of cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, TNF-a) and polymorphism of promoter regions of cytokine genes (IL4, IL10 and IL2, TNFA) in children with atopic bronchial asthma with different levels of disease control. Method: We have examined 2 groups of childrenfifty-nine children with controlled BA (CBA) and fifty-one with uncontrolled BA (UBA). Mean age in the sample was 13.36 AE 2.24 years. Control group of healthy children (n = 52) was also studied. All individuals were Russians (Eastern Slavs) from Krasnoyarsk Territory (West Siberia). Diagnoses, severity, level of disease control were defined according to GINA recommendations. Immunocompetent cells were counted in blood using fluorescent microscopy. Humoral branch indices and cytokine levels (IL-4, IL-10, IL-2, TNF-a) in blood serum were measured by ELISA. Genotyping of single nucleotide polymorphism in cytokine genes was performed by PCR and restriction fragment length analysis. Genotype frequencies were tested for deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) by Fisher's exact test. Results: Significant differences between the groups were found for TNF-a, IL-4, IgE levels and the relative amount of CD8 + cells (was increased), while the counts of CD3 + cells and the relative amount of CD4 + cells was decreased in UBA as compared to CBA (P < 0.05). In CBA, lower concentration of the IL-10 in serum associated with the IL10 A-597 allele was observed. The IL4 T-590 allele tends to be associated with UBA. Conclusion: The level of TNF-a, IL-4, IgE and the CD3 + , CD4 + and CD8 + cell counts were identified as markers of uncontrolled course of ABA in children. Polymorphisms of the IL4, IL10, IL2, TNFA genes are associated with allergic inflammation in UBA and can be considered as candidate markers of uncontrolled ABA. The independent and interaction effects between GSTP1 gene and smoking habit in adult asthma for identifying bronchial hyperresponsiveness and asthma. In this study, the objective was to investigate the association between polymorphisms of GSTP1 genotype, lung function and IgE concentrations in adult asthma. Furthermore, we explored the relationship of GSTP1 genotype, smoking and asthma. Methods: We recruited 524 hospital based asthmatic adults and 524 community controls with age and sex matched controls in this case-control study, and excluded the controls who were asthma, pneumonia, tuberculosis, emphysema, COPD and cancers by self-report. The five tagSNPs including GSTP1 rs6591256, GSTP1 Ile 105 / Val 105 (rs1695), rs749174, rs1871042 and rs947895 were selected from HapMap website. All subjects were genotyped by using real-time PCR and analyzed by the questionnaire. Results: The smokers carried major homozygous allele for five SNPs had significantly increased risk of asthma after controlling the confounding factors (AOR = 2.58, 2.56, 2.49, 2.47 and 2.47 for GSTP1 rs6591256, rs1695, rs749174, rs1871042 and rs947895, respectively). It was founded that the major allele (AAC) of rs6591256-rs1695-rs1871042 on asthma (OR = 1.93) in ever-smokers had increasing risk in the haplotype analyses, but not in never smokers. Conclusion: The results observed that major homozygous carriers and the haplotype (AAC) of GSTP1 tagSNPs increased the risk of asthma in ever-smokers. There-fore, cigarette smoking and GSTP1 gene may play important roles in adult asthma. Background: Asthma has a complex genetic background, and it is likely that multiple genes contribute to their development through main direct effects and through gene-gene interactions. Cytokines contribute to different aspects of asthma as they could determine the type, severity and outcomes of asthma pathogenesis. Allergic asthma patients undergoing an asthmatic attack exhibit significantly higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, but in general asthma is associated with the evident cytokine network disbalance. In recent years cytokines and their receptors have been shown to be highly polymorphic therefore we investigated polymorphisms of genes coding interleukins IL1B, IL6, IL10 in relation asthma in children. Methods: We analysed 5 polymorphisms in 3 interleukins genes in 497 children. Genotyping of healthy and affected individuals with asthma was realised using PCR-restriction fragment length polymor-phism technique. Restriction enzyme AluI was used to digest the PCR fragment of the IL1B gene. RsaI and MnlI were used for fragments of IL10 genes, BstaAI were used for IL13 gene and NlaIII and BsrBI were used for IL6 genes. Results: There were no significant differences in the genotype and allele of the 3 selected polymorphisms (IL1B, IL6, IL10) among asthmatic and healthy subjects. The frequency of recessive homozygote of IL10 gene (-592C/A) was significantly higher in the children with bronchial asthma (11.30%) than in healthy children (4.82%) (OR = 2.28; P = 0.01). The A allele was more frequent in asthmatic children compared to healthy individuals (OR = 1.849; P < 0.0001). We found that the wild homozygote of IL6 gene (-174G/C) was more frequent among asthmatics (OR = 2.47; P < 0.00001), whereas variant homozygote presented a protective factor in bronchial asthma (OR = 0.5; P = 0.0014). There were no differences between atopic and non-atopic form of asthma. Conclusion: Our study brings new insight into the complex relationship between the asthmatic inflammation and polymorphisms of selected cytokines genes. It was shown that expression and secretion of interleukins in asthmatic may be affected by genetic polymorphisms, what could contribute to the complexity and diversity of asthmatic phenotypes and endotypes. These polymorphisms may have a diseasemodifying effect in the asthmatic airway. Background: Many studies have shown the importance for BHR in children with bronchial asthma and allergic rhinitis. However, studies have not been done in BHR in school age and adolescence with atopic dermatitis (AD). Method: The patients with history of bronchial asthma were excluded and MCT were performed in 103 children with atopic dermatitis. The positive of MCT result is defined as PC20 ≤ 8 mg/ml. According of the level of PC20, the patients were divided into two groups. Results: The Group 1 (=BHR + ) was observed in 43 (41.7%) of all patient. Of two groups, significant differences were observed in age, BMI, parental allergic disease. No significant differences were observed in the number of male, SCORAD index, admission history, smoking exposure history, other allergic disease. The Group 1 (=BHR + ) have higher levels of total eosinophil count compared with the Group 2 (=BHR À ) (629.8 AE 36 0.5 vs 470.17 AE 253.9/lL, P = 0.01). No significant association was found between severity of BHR and SCORAD score, total IgE, total eosinophil count and ECP (Eosinophil Cationic Protein) (r = 0.008, P = 0.961; r = À0.217, P = 0.162; r = 0.225, P = 0.147; r = À0.032, P = 0.841). The list of allergen is that the house dust mite, tree, weed, food, animal hair, fungus. The house dust mite has correlation with bronchial hypersensitivity statistically and the any of allergen groups, too. Conclusion: No significant relationship was observed between degree of BHR and allergy laboratory finding, severity of AD. The risk of childhood asthma varies by type of cesarean section: a Danish population-based register study Background: The development of childhood asthma has previously been linked to birth by cesarean section. A main difference between emergency and elective caesarean section is the rupture of membranes and thereby microbial transmission from the mother. The objective of this study was to analyze whether the asthma risk in the offspring differ with type of caesarean section in the Danish population. Methods: This prospective national registry study is based on all children born in Denmark during 1997-2010. Asthma was defined by recurrent in-patient hospital admissions; long-term outpatient treatments; or long-term use of inhaled corticosteroids. Emergency section after rupture of membranes was compared to elective section before rupture of membranes. Results were stratified by parity (including first-and second-born), and adjusted for calendar year, age, gender, birth weight, gestational age, multiple births, maternal asthma, age, employment, smoking and antibiotic use during pregnancy. Results: The 900 000 children were born in Denmark during 1997-2010. Both emergency and elective cesarean section increased the risk of all asthma phenotypes compared to natural delivery among the first-born children with confounder adjusted incidence rate ratios (IRR) of 1.12 and 1.14. Cesarean section also increased the asthma risk for second born children compared to natural birth, and in addition there was a significant difference between types of cesarean sectionselective section had 9% (P = 0.035) higher risk of asthma compared to emergency section. Conclusions: Both delivery by elective and emergency cesarean section was positively associated with increased risk of three different phenotypes of childhood asthma. The increased risk of asthma after elective section emphasizes the potential role of the microbiome in immune programming early in life. Objective: To compare the peculiarities of the course of severe bronchial asthma (BA) depending on the type of local inflammation. Materials and methods: Fifty-nine patients (27 male and 32 female) with severe BA, mean age (58.7 AE 11.7) years according to the questionnaire, spirometry, the local immunity (cellular composition of induced sputum) were divided into 4 groups depending on the type of inflammation. Results: In group I, (35 (59.3%) prevailed neutrophilic type of inflammation, in II (6 (10.2%)eosinophilic in III -6 (10.2%)mixed (neutrophil-eosinophilic) and IV -(12 (20.3%) mononuclear (lymphocytes and alveolar macrophages). All patients had the same degree of severity of the disease. But in the I group the number of patients with 3-4 exacerbations per last year was higher (80.0 AE 6.8)% (P < 0.05) vs II and III groups. In I group there were more patients with ≥4 exacerbations per year and with 3-4 hospitalisations, prolongation of exacerbations >30 days. In group I daily doses of inhaled corticosteroids weres the highest and patients received more than three courses of systemic corticosteroids (P < 0.05). In group I there were more patients in whom short-acting b2agonists were ineffective. Atopic status was most pronounced in groups II and III, where seasonal exacerbation of BA were more severe than in group I, linke symptoms with allergens was in (66.7 AE 19.2)% of patients ((P < 0.05) compared with group I). Conclusions: Analysis of phenotypic indicators detected the heterogeneous nature of local immunity. The use of assessment of local immunity may lead to personified approach in treatment of severe asthma patients. Sleep structure characteristics and influence of it's certain phases on heart rate in patients with severe asthma Aim of the investigation: To identify the relation between the heart rhythm violation and duration of sleep phases in patients with severe asthma. Materials and methods: Sixty patients with severe, partially controlled asthma (27 male and 33 female aged 24 to 83 years) were examined, FEV1 -(56.4 AE 2.0)%. Patients were held Holter ECG monitoring with cardiac rhythm disorders measurement and polysomnography with sleep phase measurement. The results of the investigation: The duration of the phases of sleep in studied patients was measured: REM phase was (21.5 AE 3.0)% of the total amount of sleep (normal range 20-25%). Reducing sleep phase III (12.5 AE 1.7)% and sleep phase IV (0.6 AE 0.2)% were identified (normal of III-IV phases 15-23% in total). Holter monitoring has revealed the praesence of supraventricular extrasystoles (premature beats) per night period (27.1 AE 2.6)%, per 24 h (119.5 AE 31.2)%. In the course of correlation analysis, the presence of statistically significant (P < 0.05) inverse correlation between the amount of supraventricular extrasystoles per night period and sleep duration of Phase IV (r = À2.634) and between the number of supraventricular extrasystoles per 24 h and sleep phase III (r = À2.245) were revealed. Conclusion: Reducing the duration of sleep phases III and IV increases the risk of supraventricular extrasystoles emergence, showing an increased risk of arrhythmias and indirectly reflects the increased risk of cardiovascular disease in this group of patients. The influence of body mass on spirometric results of patients with asthma and COPD Background: Asthma and COPD are complex diseases with broad pathological background. The increasing number of evidence show, that body mass may play a role in disease severity, response to the treatment and prognosis. The aim of the current study was to analyze the degree airflow limitation measured in patients with asthma and COPD depending on the BMI and body mass. Methods: The group of 321 patients hospitalised in the Department of Allergology, Medical University of Gdansk in the years 2010-2011, Poland was studied including 191 patients with asthma (mean age 50 SD 14, 74% women, 26% men) and 130 with COPD (mean age 67 SD 10, 35% women, 65% men). Spirometric examination was performed using Lungtest 1000 (MES, Poland) at the end of the hospitalisation. Obesity, overweight and underweight was defined according to BMI classification. Results: Underweight was found in 6 (3%) of patients with asthma and 5 (4%) of COPD group. Overweight and obesity were observed in majority of subjects (respectively in 64 (35%) and 50 (26%) asthmatics and 59 (45%) and 24 (18%) of COPD patients). In both groups higher BMI was more often found in men than women (asthma 28.1% vs 26.3% P = 0.02; COPD 26.6% vs 24.7% P = 0.02). These results are similar with the general population of Poland (men 45% overweight, 17% obesity; women 30% overweight, 15% obesity) [data of the central statistic office of Poland 2009]. The clear relation of BMI below 20 and above 35 in patients with COPD is related with impaired airflow (mean FEV1 in patients with BMI in a range 20-35 is 58% SD 21, whereas in patients with BMI < 20 or >35 is 47% SD 16; P = 0.03). There was no relation of BMI and airflow limitation in patients with asthma. Conclusion: Overweight and obesity are common in patients with asthma and COPD. The BMI below 20 and above 35 is related with the impaired airflow in COPD patients. Such a relation was not found in asthma group, which does not exclude other negative influence of an improper body mass on the disease severity. Background: To study clinical, morphological features, to estimate influence of therapy on abilities of neogenesis of mucosas in patients with bronchial asthma (BA) of various age. Method: Clinical and epidemiological data of ambulatories were analysed. The risk factors, given laboratory and tool methods of research are studied. We used standard bench tests and tool methods. Special bench tests included immunogram, research of systemic hormonal level of a subthalamic hypophysial thyroid gland in Serum, using a radioimmunoassay and immunodetection enzyme methods. Morphological examination scraping nasal cavities (SNC), bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was executed by using scanning and transmission eletron a microscopy, the same methods were used for semi-thin sections (STS). Results: Patients were divided into three groups: the first group -57 patients with BA (14-18 years), the second group -79 patients with BA (19-35 years), the third group -61 patients with BA (36-55 years). In group of teenagers the mild form of a disease is taped at 40.3%, an average form at 32.8%, and a serious form at 26.9%. At adult patients (19-55 years) forms made 20%, 50% and 30% respectively. Accompanying pathologies of BA which were diagnosed among a half of patients, were a gastrointestinal tract, endocrine systemic illnesses, vascular dystonia. In the third group the quantity of accompanying illnesses was more, than in other groups. Our practice shows that the complex treatment referred on well-timed purpose of the main treatment and allergen of a specific immunotherapy (ASIT), is the most effective method for asthma treatment now. After therapy of ASIT there is an intensive decrease of a reactivity of mucosas of respiratory tracts, intensifying of neogenesis of an epithelial barrier which at young patients are more expressed in comparison with adults. These data are confirmed by us clinical and morphological methods. Well-timed delivery of ASIT not only reduces development of clinical symptoms of asthma, but also reduces quantity of used drugs, reducing risk of development of serious forms of illness and improvement of quality of life of the patient. Conclusion: It is shown that well-timed purpose of the main treatment and ASIT leads to fast morphological neogenesis of an epithelium of mucosas of respiratory tracts (more at young patients), considerably extends the remission period, allows to reduce expenses of the patient. Association between asthma and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorders in children: potential risk factors Subjects-patients: Five hundred and twenty children with asthma and ADHD (A-ADHD) and 520 controls aged 5-16 years old matched controls. Methods and subjects: Questionnaire, clinical manifestations, family history, BMI, serum 25(OH) vitamin D, calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium. Results: The mean age (AE SD, in years) for A-ADHD children vs controls was 9.92 AE 3.3 vs 10.20 AE 3.4. Vitamin D was lower for asthmatic-ADHD compared to controls (17.25 AE 10.53 ng/ml vs 23.91 AE 9.82, P < 0.0001). Of 520 asthmatic-ADHD, 18.4% had severe vitamin D deficiency (<10 ng/ml). Obesity was commoner in A-ADHD (P < 0.001). Calcium & phosphorous higher in controls than A-ADHD (P < 0.001). Serum vitamin D, iron, ferritin, hemoglobin, magnesium & potassium were significantly lower for A-ADHD than controls (P < 0.001 for each comparison). There was significant correlation between vitamin D deficiency and with age (r = À0.224, P = 0.001); calcium (r = 0.256, P = 0.001); phosphorous (r = 0.316, P = 0.001); magnesium (r = 0.288, P = 0.001); and BMI (r = 0.452, P = 0.001) in A-ADHD. The multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that age-& gender-adjusted predictors for ADHD were the mean serum vitamin D & calcium, physical activity, nervous behavior, consanguinity, BMI & child order. Conclusion: Vitamin D deficiency was higher in ADHD children. Supplementing infants with vitamin D might be a safe and effective strategy for reducing the risk of ADHD. Lung ventilation-perfusion imbalance in uncontrolled asthma patients Background: Both asthma and COPD are characterised by airflow limitation. Lung ventilation-perfusion mismatching is one of the important causes of gas exchange abnormalities in COPD. Whether this mechanism has the same value in asthma? This study aimed to investigate lung ventilation-perfusion ratio in patients with uncontrolled BA compare to COPD patients. Method: Spirometry, capnometry. Data are presented as meanAESD. Results: A total of 30 subjects (age 54.7 AE 2.4 years; 50% male) were enrolled: and COPD group (n = 15, mean %FEV 1 -63.5 AE 1.7%), both groups without exacerbations. All subjects were performed capnometry that allow estimating the volume of dead space ventilation (Vde) and its part in the tidal volume (Vde%VT) as a measure of ventilation-perfusion imbalance. In BA group Vde was significantly lower than in COPD group -192 AE 11 and 232 AE 14 ml respectively (P = 0.03). This difference can be explained that lung hyperinflation is less typical for asthma than for COPD. Index Vde% VT in BA group patients -32.1 AE 1.5% was almost equal (P = 0.23) to COPD group -30 AE 0.8%. In uncontrolled asthma patients the same degree of ventilation-perfusion imbalance as in COPD patients take place despite moderate bronchial obstruction possibly due to the development of fixed airflow limitation. Conclusion: The lack of asthma control may lead to irreversible lung damage as in COPD. Apoptosis and lymphocyte subpopulations in mild and severe atopic asthma Background: Chronic airway inflammation in atopic asthma (AA) is regulated predominantly by lymphocytes. AA may have various degrees of apoptosis in ymphocyte subpopulations depending on disease severity. Methods: Ten patients in two groups, one with mild atopic asthma (M-AA) and one with severe (S-AA) persistent atopic asthma along with a control group (CG) including healthy volunteers from age 19 to 45 years old were studied. All had spirometry, bronchoprovocation tests, skin prick tests and IgE levels. Lymphocyte subpopulations were assessed by flow cytometry (FASCalibur, Becton Dickinson) for CD3, CD4, CD8, CD16, CD56 (Multi-TEST IMK, Becton Dickinson). Spontaneous and dexamethasone-induced apoptosis of lymphocytes was assessed following 6 days of incubation. P < 0.05) and CG (1.39 AE 0.32, P < 0.05). Spontaneous late stage apoptosis was three-fold greater in S-AA than in M-AA (12.63% vs 4.28%). Dexamethasone increased apoptosis in CG from 10.07% to 14.90%, with no impact in M-AA (4.28% to 5.10%) but decrease in S-AA (12.63% to 7.70%). Early stages of apoptotic changes were seen less in S-AA (36.00%) and M-AA (32.00%) than in CG (60.00%). Conclusion: Severe AA lymphocytes have more late stage apoptosis, especially for CD8+ and NK cells with a relative elevation in CD4+ and B cells leading to greater inflammatory response. Mild AA lymphocytes are less impacted by these apoptotic influences. The frequency of sleep-disordered breathing in children with asthma and its effects on asthma control Background: The presence of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) can make difficult to control of asthma and this could lead to increase the economic and social burden. The frequence of sleep-disordered breathing has been reported to be between 0.3% and 7% of children but this freuquency is unclear in children with asthma yet. Objectives: In this study we aimed to evaluate the frequency and clinical presentation of SDB children with asthma and whether these have any effects on asthma control in these patients. Methods: Three hundred and forty patients at least 1 year followed-up with a diagnosis of asthma between June and September 2013 were evaluated. Sleep-disordered breathing of the patients was evaluated with the validated Turkish version of of Pediatric Sleep questionnaire. Additionally the level of asthma control was assessed according to GINA criteria. Results: Three hundred and forty children with asthma (range 4-18 years) were included in the study. Two hundred and twenty-nine of 340 (67.4%) patients were male and the mean age was 8.4 AE 3.2 years. Mean follow up period was 4.2 AE 2.9 years. Of all patients; 46.2% had positive skin prick test, 38.5% had accompanying allergic rhinitis and 6.8% accompanying gastroesophageal reflux. Fifty-three patients (15.6%) were obese in all patients. SDB was detected in 97 of all patients (28.5%). It was found that SDB rate was higher in uncontrolled asthma patients than controlled asthma (%55.4 vs 18.5; P < 0.001). Obese children had a significantly higher rate SDB than non-obese. (43.4% vs 15.8%; P = 0.015). Multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed that SDB was risk factor for uncontrolled asthma when adjusted for the variables age, sex, atopy, accompanying allergic rhinitis, passive smoking, obesity parameters (OR: 5.464, 95%CI:3.246-9.174 P < 0.001). Conclusions: Rate of SDB was high in children who have asthma. Sleep-disordered breathing is an important risk factor for uncontrolled asthma. It is suggested that obese children with asthma is needed to be further investigations for the presence SDB. Allergen detection in small airway Rueda-Garc Background: On 1995 Ferguson et al. demonstrated the relationship between environmental exposure to house dust mites and the presence of Der p1 in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid of nine atopic asthmatics sensitised to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. No other papers have been published to assess the presence of allergens from mites, pollens, moulds or animal dander in small airways. The aim of this study was to demonstrate the presence or absence of allergens in small airway, by studying bronchoalveolar lavage with monoclonal antibodies (Alt a 1, Alternaria alternata; Phl p 5, Phleum praetense; Der p 1, Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus). Methods: Samples of bronchoalveolar lavage were collected and prepared to perform electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and quantification of major allergen (antibody detection by ELISA). Results: A total of 48 samples were collected (21 females and 27 males). The quantification of the major allergen of Phleum praetense, Alternaria alternata and Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Phl p 5, Alt a 1 i Der p 1) was negative for all the samples. Conclusion: Some particles may be at a very low concentration in the bronchoalveolar lavage which complicates their detection. On the other hand the use of monoclonal antibodies improves the efficiency of the study. Maybe the allergens do not need to reach small airway to trigger the answer. Background: The purpose of the study to explore the properties of virulent strains of fungi of the genus Candida spp., Isolated from mycobiota throat in patients with bronchial asthma, long-term use of inhaled corticosteroids. Method and results: Objectives of the study were: certain types of structures, adhesive and proteolytic activity of yeast fungi of the genus Candida, colonising the oral mucosa in patients with asthma receiving inhaled corticosteroids long, compared with patients of asthma, inhaled corticosteroids do not apply, the study in vitro action of proteolytic enzymes secreted by fungi of the genus Candida spp. culture of peripheral blood lymphocytes isolated. Studied virulence strains of fungi of the genus Candida spp., Isolated from mycobiota throat in 30 patients with bronchial persistent asthma taking medium and high doses of inhaled corticosteroids for at least 1 year and in 15 steroidnaive patients of bronchial asthma (control group). Fungi were identified by conventional methods (morphology, the presence of germination tubes, chlamydospores, fermentation of carbohydrates). Antibiotic sensitivity was determined by disk on an agar growing Saburo. Determination of adhesion was performed on the model developed using nitrocellulose film immobilized hemoglobin. Proteinase activity in the supernatant was determined at two pH: acidic (pH = 4.5) and weakly alkaline (pH = 7.8) ELISA method. Determination of CD cellular proteolysis leukocyte receptors was performed the cytofluorometrics method. Conclusions: The incidence of fungal colonisation of the pharynx in patients with bronchial asthma constantly inhaled corticosteroids are applying amounted to 76.7%. Most of fungal strains were characterised by distinct virulence properties (highly adhesive (44%) and enzymatic activity), and multidrug-resistant to antifungal (52%), which was statistically significantly higher than those in the comparison group. The ability of these strains to secrete proteolytic enzymes (against CD4+ T-lymphocytes surface receptors) provides additional immunomodulatory mechanism of Candida albicans in invasive infection. Gluten intake can simultaneously induce gastrointestinal symptoms and asthma attacks Ibranji, A 1 ; Qirko, E 2 ; Qerimi, D 3 ; Mingomataj, E 2,4 1 Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 'Mother Theresa' School of Medicine, Tirane, Albania; 2 'Mother Theresa' School of Medicine, Tirane, Albania; 3 Regional Hospital Durres, Durres, Albania; 4 Faculty of Technical Medical Sciences, Tirane, Albania Background: Asthma pathophysiology implies immunological components that may share mechanisms with autoimmune diseases such as celiac disease (CD). Recent findings support the strong relationship between these two pathologies and the high risk potential of each disease per se to develop the other one. Method: We present the clinical case of the 42 years old female patients, with a 20 years asthma history and 18 years CD diagnosed and followed up from the specialists of our clinic. She had a well-controlled allergic asthma (sensitised to house dust mites) and she has been on strict gluten free diet for the last 10 years. She presented in the emergency unit 4 times during the 3 last years with similar and simultaneous symptoms such as: bloating, nausea, diarrea, dispnea, coughing and sudden wheezing. Results: After a careful investigation of her history we found that the occurrence of the symptoms in all 4 cases was related to accidental gluten-containing food intake. Gastrointestinal symptoms appeared almost 30 min up to 1 h after food intake preceeding respiratory symptoms that appeared 24 h up to 4 days later. Conclusion: CD has been associated with various autoimmune disorders and is found as a comorbidity in asthmatic patients as well. The association of asthma attacks related to gluten intake in a celiac patient not only supports gluten as a trigger but supports the autoimmune asthma pathophysiological mechanisms. Maternal propensity for infections is a risk for childhood asthma Introduction: Maternal use of antibiotics during pregnancy has been associated with asthmatic disorders in the offspring, but it is unknown whether this association is causal. We have studied the causal link through the timing between maternal antibiotic use and childbirth. Methods: Analyses on the associations between maternal antibiotic use and asthma in the offspring were based on asthma diagnosis from (1) hospital admissions, (2) long-term outpatient attendance or (3) use of inhaled corticosteroids. Data was collected from the Danish national registries in the period 1997-2010 including 910,301 children in the analysis. The analyses included maternal antibiotic use in pregnancy, as well as 80 weeks before gestation and 80 weeks after birth. Results were adjusted for socioeconomic confounders and maternal asthma. Results: Maternal usage of antibiotics in pregnancy was associated with increased risk of childhood asthma for all three asthma case definitions: inpatient admission adjusted Incidence Rate Ratio (aIRR) [95% CI] 1.24 [1.18-1.30 ]; outpatient attendance aIRR 1.22 [1.18-1.27 ]; steroid use aIRR 1.18 [1.15-1.20 ]. The effect estimates were similar for maternal antibiotic use before pregnancy and after birth. The risk of asthma increased with number of maternal antibiotic treatments and the association was observed both for antibiotics administered for respiratory tract infections and for antibiotics administered for other types of infections. Conclusion: Mother's use of antibiotics (both respiratory and non-respiratory groups of antibiotics) showed a dosedependent association with the risk of asthma in the offspring. However, this association was independent of the latent period between mother's use of antibiotics and her pregnancy. It is therefore unlikely that the association is mediated through changes in the human microbiome. Instead we suggest that maternal antibiotic use may be a surrogate marker of a propensity for infections as the genetic risk linked to childhood asthma. Background: Bronchial epithelial cells are the first-line barrier against respiratory infections by initiating acute inflammation and producing chemokines recruiting inflammatory cells and are involved in the pathogenesis of asthma. Regulated on activation, normal T expressed and secreted (RANTES) is a chemokine which attracts eosinophils, mast cells and basophils toward site of allergic inflammation. Interferon c-inducible protein (IP)-10 plays an important role in asthmatic inflammation and exacerbation. Epithelial cell-derived neutrophil-activating peptide 78 (ENA-78) is a neutrophil-active chemoattractant contributing airway neutrophilia in patients with severe asthma. PGI 2 analogs are recently regarded as having potential in treating asthma for their anti-inflammatory effects. However, the effect of PGI 2 analogs on the expression of RANTES, IP-10 and ENA-78 are unknown. Methods: The human bronchial epithelial cell lines, BEAS-2B cells and normal bronchial epithelial cell lines were pretreated with different concentrations of PGI 2 analogs including iloprost, treprostinil, beraprost and ONO-1301, or dibutyryl-cAMP (a cyclic AMP analog) before polyinosinicpolycytidylic acid (poly I:C) stimulation. The levels of RANTES, IP-10 and ENA-78 were measured by ELISA. The involved signaling was investigated by receptor antagonists, pathway inhibitors and Western blotting. Results: Iloprost, treprostinil, beraprost and ONO-1301 suppressed poly I:Cinduced RANTES, IP-10 and ENA-78. The effect was partly reversed by the selective IP receptor antagonist CAY 10449 and EP4 receptor antagonist GW 627368X. Dibutyryl-cAMP conferred a similar effect. Iloprost suppressed poly I:Cinduced phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-p38. Conclusion: PGI 2 analogs suppressed poly I:C-induced RANTES, IP-10 and ENA-78 via the IP/EP4-cAMP pathway and the MAPK-p38 pathway in human bronchial epithelial cells. PGI 2 analogs may have potential to treat asthma by suppressing asthma-related chemokines production by bronchial epithelial cells. Background: Acute viral bronchiolitis in young children as an important impact in public heath considering the winter epidemics that occur every year with a large number of infants requiring hospitalisation. The respiratory syncytial virus is one of the major agents and the first infection is usually the most severe. Multiple factors can contribute for a severe bronchiolitis in early-life as well as for recurrent wheezing later in infancy. The objective of this study was to analyze the association between the characteristics of the first episode of bronchiolitis requiring hospitalisation (days of hospitalisation, lowest peripheral oxygen saturation, therapeutics, viral etiology, complications and prophylactic treatment initiated) with the recurrence of bronchiolitis in children under 6 months old. Method: Seventy-nine infants under 6 months old hospitalised with the first episode of acute bronchiolitis during two consecutive winter seasons (in 2011 and 2012) were selected and followed for 12 months. The children were retrospectively studied for respiratory symptoms through the analysis of the follow-up medical appointments, visits to the emergency service, and by interviews to the parents. A sample of nasopharyngeal aspirate was collected from infants hospitalised with acute respiratory disease and a molecular diagnosis was performed (PCR/clinical Arrays). A Multiple Regression Model was used to analyze the association between variables in study. Results: There were no significant correlations between days of hospitalisation, lowest peripherical oxygen saturation, therapeutics (systemic corticosteroids, antibiotics, cinesiotherapy), viral etiology (VRS, adenovirus, rhinovirus, metapneumovirus), complications (pneumonia, atelectasia) and prophylactic treatment initiated (montelucaste, inhaled corticosteroids) and recurrence of bronchiolitis during the following 12 months after the first episode of bronchiolitis. Conclusion: In our study there were no relevant association between the characteristics of the first episode of bronchiolitis requiring hospitalisation and the recurrence of bronchiolitis episodes. Poster Session Group I -Blue TPS 9 -Atopic dermatitis I: Genes, IgE sensitisation 572 Personality, anxiety, depression and atopic dermatitis severity: a cross sectional study Background: Atopic Dermatitis (AD) is a multifactorial, chronic and relapsing skin disease, characterised by intense pruritus and eczematous lesions that contribute to significant emotional distress, sleep disturbance and impact on the Quality of Life (QoL) of both patients and their families. Psychological stress deregulates central and peripheral Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal axis leading to a possible immune imbalance. As there are few studies addressing the association of psychological parameters with AD severity, the aim of this study was to evaluate the association between anxiety and depression levels, personality traits and disease severity in adult patients with AD. Method: A total of 69 patients, over 16 yo and previously diagnosed with AD were recruited between November, 2011 and June, 2012 to be clinically evaluated by a dermatologist and an immunoallergologist. Patients presenting severe comorbidities or other immune mediated skin diseases were excluded. Anxiety and depression levels were evaluated through the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS)into normal, mild, moderate and severe. Personality traits were assessed through NEO Five Factor Inventoryevaluating neuroticism, extroversion, openness, agreeableness and consciousness. AD severity was evaluated through SCORAD and Quality of Life (QoL) through DLQI (Dermatology Life Quality Index). Results: A total of 44 patients were enrolledmean age (SD) of 31 (13) yo, 39% males. SCORAD mean (SD) was 45 (28) and DLQI mean (SD) was 8 (5) . Thirty-four percent of patients presented anxiety while only 14% presented depression. No correlation was found between anxiety and SCORAD while a positive correlation was suggested between depression and SCORAD (R = 0.3; P = 0.068). As for personality traits, a one-way ANO-VA mean comparison for each trait and SCORAD showed significant differences only for Consciousness (P = 0.039). Concerning QoL, a linear regression model presented SCORAD as the strongest predictor. Conclusion: As for other immune mediated skin diseases, future studies are required to undoubtedly prove the association between AD severity and several psychological parameters. Also, it is of vital importance to establish whether depression is a cause or a consequence of having a more severe phenotype of the disease. In a near future, psychotherapeutic interventions may present as an important instrument for disease control. This work was supported within the scope of PP_IJUP2011_91. Atopic dermatitis in early life: arguments for at least two phenotypes? Results of the GUSTO study Loo, XLE 1 ; Shek, LP 1,2 ; Goh, A 3 ; Teoh, OH 3 ; Chan, YH 4 ; Soh, SE 1,5 ; Saw, SM 5 ; Kwek, K 6 ; Gluckman, PD 7,8 ; Godfrey, KM 9,10 ; Chong, YS 7,11 ; Lee, BW 1 ; Van Bever, H 1,2 1 Department of Paediatrics, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; 2 Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National University Hospital, National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore; 3 Department of Paediatrics, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, Singapore; 4 Biostatistics Unit, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore; 5 Background: The prevalence of allergic diseases, such as atopic dermatitis (AD), has been increasing worldwide. AD had been highlighted to be a likely first step of the 'atopic march'. Hence it is vital to pinpoint the factors that may predispose a child to developing AD. Method: We evaluated AD risk factors and phenotypes in a large birth cohort. We defined two phenotypes of doctor-diagnosed AD based on the time of onset of the disease: early AD, occurring within the first 4 months of life, and late AD, starting after the age of 12 months. Results: A maternal allergic history was associated with an increased risk of developing early onset AD (adjusted odds ratio (OR), 95% CI: 5.48, 1.11-27.15, P = 0.04), while infant consumption of antibiotics in the first 6 months of life was associated with an increased risk of late onset AD (OR, 95% CI: 5.37, 1.64-17.54, P = 0.01). Having siblings (OR, 95% CI: 0.16, 0.03-0.78, P = 0.02) was associated with a reduced risk of developing AD after 12 months of age. Early onset of doctor-diagnosed AD (OR, 95% CI: 5.34, 1.32-21.63, P = 0.02) was associated with an increased risk of developing allergic sensitisation, while late onset of AD was not associated with allergen sensitisation. Conclusion: We found that early onset of AD is mainly associated with familial factors, such as maternal allergy, while late onset of AD is mainly affected by environmental factors. Our study supports the concept that different phenotypes of AD exist in young children. Background: Atopic dermatitis in infants is a common disease. Changing the stereotype of diet and lifestyle, environmental and other factors can influence on the character of sensitisation. Determination the etiological role of different allergens in infants is important to better treatment and prevention of disease. Objective: The aim of research was to compare prevalence of sensitisation to common food and aeroallergens in children aged 1-12 months with diagnosed of atopic dermatitis in different years. Methods: Were compared the frequency of identification specific IgE in 2008 and 2013 in the Saratov region in two equal groups of children examined. In each group 100 children aged 1-12 months, suffered from atopic dermatitis were examined (SCO-RAD 21-40 score). Allergy diagnosis was based on clinical history and physical examination confirmed by skin prick tests and specific IgE tests. Allergen-specific IgE in sera determined using immunoblots RIDA Allergy Screen (R-BIOPHARM, Germany) to identify different types of non-infectious allergens. The RIDA â Al-lergyScreen thus yields in a short time a specific patient's sensibilization pattern of the most common allergens. The evaluation of the panels is done automatically. Comparison between results of 225 tests of skin test and results of research by set RIDA AllergyScreen have shown: sensitivity of test -95.1%, specifity of test -80.2%, accuracy: 88.3%. Results: In infancy with atopic dermatitis (skin manifestation food allergy) prevalence of positive specific IgE levels to food allergens from 2008 to 2013 decreased from 76 to 67%, including milkfrom 61 to 50%, peanuts from 12 to 6%, but little increased the number of children sensitised to soybeans (from 1 to 4%) and significantly increased to egg white from 9 to 25%. Insignificantly increased sensitisation to pollen (from 2 to 4%), mites (2-5%), mould (1-3%). Significantly increased the frequency of sensitisation to epidermal allergens (from 3 to 21%). Conclusions: Due to the high medical and social significance of allergic diseases, the important role of food, inhaled and epidermal allergens in development of atopic dermatitis monitoring of sensitisation patterns is necessity. Association of filaggrin mutations with the development of atopic and contact dermatitis in childhood (early-onset) or in adulthood (late-onset) in Slovenian patients Background: Filaggrin (FLG) is one of the most important epidermal structure protein involved in epidermal barrier homeostasis. It is encoded by the FLG gene, which is located within the epidermal differentiation complex on chromosome 1q21. Goal of our study was to estimate the association of four most com-monly described FLG mutations R501X, 2282del4, R2447X, and S3247X with the development of atopic dermatitis (AD), allergic contact dermatitis (ACD)) in Slovenian patients. Method: Four prevalent loss-of-function mutations in the FLG gene (R501X, 2282del4, R2447X and S3247X) were genotyped in 241 AD, 100 ACD and 44 CICD patients and in 164 healthy controls from Slovenia. Results: The most frequent FLG mutation 2282del4, but not R501X, R2447X or S3247X, was significantly associated with greater risk for AD (OR = 4.33, 95% CI: 1.26-14.96, P = 0.012). Furthermore, subgroup analysis among AD patients revealed that carriers of FLG loss-of-function mutation were more likely to have earlier onset (<2 years: OR = 8.09, 95% CI: 2.19-29.87, P = 0.0006) and longer persistence of the disease (>20 years: OR = 15.54, 95% CI: 4.13-58.44, P < 0.0001) as well as they more often required hospitalisation (OR = 12.38, 95% CI: 3.36-45.60, P < 0.0001). On the other hand no association between FLG mutations and ACD or CICD, were found. Conclusion: The FLG loss-of-function mutations increases the risk for development of AD, but not ACD or CICD, in Slovenian patients. Furthermore, FLG mutations are a predisposing factor for a more severe AD phenotype, leading to earlier onset, longer persistence and hospitalisation. Background: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common inflammatory skin condition with important impact in patient 0 s quality of life. In severe cases, conventional management with emollients and topical corticosteroids (CS), or even systemic immunossupressant drugs may not be effective. Omalizumab is a recombinant humanized monoclonal anti-IgE antibody approved for severe refractory asthma. Its use in selected cases of severe AD can be beneficial. Method: We report the case of a 13 yearold girl with asthma, rhinitis, fish allergy and AD. She presented cutaneous symptoms since she was 2 year, with progressive worsening in the last 4 year resulting in a severely impaired quality of life despite adequate treatment, which included oral CS, cyclosporin and UV therapy. She was referred to our department at age of 12. Skin prick tests and specific IgEs were positive to house dust mites, grass pollen, pigeon 0 s droppings and several fish species, with a total serum IgE level of 1404 UI/ ml. There was no significant improvement of AD despite fish avoidance and treatment with oral antihistamines (AH), topical CS and/or pimecrolimus and oral CS. Authorization for a trial of 6 months (m) of Omalizumab (600 mg SC every 2 weeks, asthma weight-adjusted dose) was obtained. Results: Omalizumab was well tolerated with significant improvement in skin lesions and pruritus after 6 m (SCORAD reduction from 90.5 to 44.8) enabling AH discontinuation. Due to a respiratory infection Omalizumab was delayed 1 week, with recurrence of skin lesions, which recovered only 1 m after regular anti-IgE therapy. It was decided to continue treatment for further 6 m. Conclusion: Like previous reports, this case demonstrates that Omalizumab is a well tolerated drug that can be useful for the treatment of AD refractory to other systemic treatments. However there is still no consensus regarding appropriate dose or duration of therapy, so controlled studies addressing these issues, as well as efficacy in AD, are needed. Background: New efficient method for producing an aqueous dispersion of fullerene C 60 (DF) was developed. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the anti-inflammatory effects of a DF in a mouse model of atopic dermatitis (AD). Method: Experimental model of AD was produced by using epidermal sensitisation with OVA (100 mcg/mouse) during for 7 days, 3 times with 2 week intervals. Four groups of mice were used to evaluate the effects of DF: subcutaneous, intragastrical and intravenous injections at dose of 2 mg/mouse and epidermal application with 20 mcg/mouse. A group of mice treated with saline was used as a negative control. The cytokine expression was measured in supernatants of spleen cells stimulated with OVA for 72 h and OVA antibody levels in serum samples using ELISA. Results: The levels of specific IgE and IgG2a antibodies were decreased in mice of groups treated with DF (epidermal, subcutaneously and intravenously) compared to the non-treated group (atopic dermatitis). The cytokine assay showed significant decrease in concentrations of IL-4 and IL-5 in all groups treated with DF which almost reached the negative control level. The levels of IFNc and IL-12 in mice with epidermal application of DF were significantly higher compared with the non-treated group. Conclusion: These results obtained demonstrate that the DF exhibits a significant anti-inflammatory effect in mouse model of atopic dermatitis, especially via epidermal application, and possesses high therapeutic potential. The patients with AD are prone to search help in the area of complementary and alternative medicine. Complementary medicine can help in achieving the control over the disease, but should be used carefully. b-glucans are natural substances with potent immunomodulatory and antiinflammatory activity, which can be used also in the topical treatment of AD. In the multicentre open splitbody study we evaluated the effect of cream containing pleuran (b-glucan isolated from Pleurotus ostreatus, Imunoglukan P4H â cream) in the treatment of atopic dermatitis in a group of 105 patients (39 males, 37%; aged 20.4 years) during 6 months. The studied cream was applied 2 or 3 times per day on the left side of the body and as a control, standard emollient was applied on whole body 2 or 3 times daily. There were 4 visits across the study with the evaluation of subjective (using Visual Analogue Scale, VAS) and objective (EASI score, Eczema Area and Severity Index) characteristics of AD. Results: The study was completed by 80 patients (76.2%). Topical b-glucan application resulted in the significant improvement of both objective and subjective symptoms of AD. On the application side, significant decline in the number of days with AD exacerbation and its severity was observed at the end of observed period. Moreover, the subjects experienced decline of pruritus on the b-glucan half of the body (VAS score: 1.68 vs 1.95, P < 0.001). During the study, the continual and significant decline of EASI score on the site of b-glucan application was observed compared to second half of the body (V4: 1.57 vs 1.85, P < 0.001). The preparation was in general well tolerated, but 16 patients were withdrawn from the study due to intolerance to b-glucan cream. Conclusion: b-glucan-based cream (containing pleuran) can be used as a supportive complementary therapy of mild to moderate forms of atopic dermatitis due to its anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and immunomodulatory activity. Background: Emollients/moisturisers are widely used as adjuvant therapies in the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Several brands contain various molecules with a presumed or demonstrated anti-inflammatory role, such as oat -proteins. Some studies have shown that these are safe for people sensitised to grains. Method: To report a case of type-1 hypersensitivity to an oat based emollient in a child with severe atopic eczema and food allergies. Results: A 3 year old boy with severe atopic dermatitis (AD) with allergy to nuts, egg and fish presented in the paediatric allergy service following A&E attendance as 'idiopathic' anaphylaxis. He suffered urticaria, angioedema and breathing difficulties and required Adrenaline. He had suffered previous anaphylaxis triggered by egg and Peanut. He declared a minor reaction on eating oats but tolerated other grains and with wheat on a regular dietary basis. The aetiology of the most recent reaction was not clear, with no time-relationship related to food. He was using several emollients including an oat based cream which his mother applied just before the A&E admission. On assessment we performed SPT with oat solution and this elicited a weal with flare of 16 mm. The SPT was repeated at age 6 and was 4 mm. Because of the reduced SPT size we performed a supervised challenge with oat but he developed anaphylaxis during the test. We then challenged him with oat-based cream and application of the cream triggered marked localised urticaria. Conclusion: Oat sensitisation in AD children has been reported to be higher than expected (1) . Its application via emollient in predisposed patients with impaired epidermal barrier is the postulated mechanism underlining this. We describe a case of oat allergy in a child who tolerated all other grains. We also report a case of anaphylaxis to the topical application of an oat-based emollient. Caution should be exercised when prescribing oat based emollients to patients with confirmed oat allergy. Background: Oral immunosuppressive drugs are off-label recommended for recalcitrant atopic eczema, in which conventional treatment cannot control disease activity. However, there is no study documenting the best systemic agent to choose and there is limited data on its correct use in the pediatric setting. This study was designed to retrospectively assess clinical response to azathioprine in a cohort of children currently being followed-up in our reference hospital clinic. Methods: Ten children (mean age 11 years-old, male to female ratio of 1.2) with severe atopic eczema were treated with oral azathioprine. Baseline thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) was measured in order to minimize the risk of toxicity and reach the effective dose (1-3 mg/kg/ day), and patients were followed-up every 6 weeks for clinical assessment and laboratory testing. Results are based on retrospective examination of data taken from the hospital notes of these children. Results: Clinical improvement was observed in all patients, being more pronounced after 3 months of therapy, with significant decreases in erythema, excoriation, lichenification and extent of eczema, with significant fewer flare-ups. In all patients, there was a decrease in the need for high-potency topical steroids or oral steroids prescribed for exacerbations. The only dropout patient corresponded to a 7 year-old female who developed neutropenia after 5 months (blood count with 1040 neutrophils), the reason why she discontinued azathioprine and restarted topical treatment. One 16 year-old male had completed 1-year treatment with significant improvement, and afterwards started on omalizumab due to concomitant severe allergic asthma; however an eczema flare-up was observed after stopping azathioprine which was then restarted. Conclusion: Although the small sample size may be a limitation, this study shows that azathioprine appears to be beneficial in the treatment of pediatric recalcitrant atopic eczema, with few side effects. TPS 10 -Atopic dermatitis II 583 Gender differences in association between body mass index and current eczema in adulthood Vindenes, HK 1 ; Real, FG 2,3 ; Svanes, C 1,3,4 ; Johannessen, A 3 ; Skorge, TD 1,3 ; Omenaas, E 3 ; Jarvis, D 5 ; Dharmage, S 6 ; Leynaert, B 7,8 ; Norb€ ack, D 9 ; Lindberg, E 9 ; Stutz, EZ 10 ; Janson, C 9 ; Dratva, J 10 ; Russell, MA 6 ; Bertelsen, RJ 1,3 1 Department of Occupational Medicine, Haukeland Background: Obesity has been associated with an increased risk of atopic dermatitis in children, in particular among girls. Few studies have assessed the association between obesity and dermatitis and addressed gender-specific differences in adulthood. We aimed to describe the association between body mass index (BMI) and eczema in adulthood, with particular emphasis on gender-specific differences. Method: Information on measured weight and height and interview data on eczema was available from 8949 participants (aged 30-55 years) of the European Community Respiratory Health Survey II. Current eczema was defined as itchy rash coming and going for at least 6 months during the last 12 months. Persons with previous but not current itchy rash were excluded from the analyses. The association of current eczema with BMI was analysed with logistic regression models, adjusting for age, smoking, one or more specific IgEs, parental history of asthma/allergy, current use of asthma medication and clustering by study centre. Results: In the whole group current eczema (14.5%) increased generally with increasing BMI (OR per unit change = 1.02; 95%CI 1.01-1.04), an effect that was only identified among non-atopics (1.03 [1.01-1.05]). In women (15.6% with current eczema), the odds ratio for current eczema increased with increasing BMI categories (Table 1) , whereas a similar association was not seen for men (13.2% with current eczema). When including predilection areas affected by itchy rash as an additional criterion, current eczema remained statistically significant associated with the highest BMI category in women OR = 1.40 (95% CI: 1.03, 1.90). Conclusion: Current eczema was more frequently reported among women with high BMI. The association between BMI and current eczema was not observed among adult men. After adding eczema in predilection areas in the definition for eczema, women in the highest BMI group (BMI≥30) were still more likely to report current eczema than women with lower BMI. The findings may point to metabolic or hormonal influences on eczema in adults. CRP was elevated (>5 mg/dl) in 23% of AD children and in none of the healthy ones (P < 0.01). Conclusion: Dietary intake of macronutrient was similar in AD and control group. AD children exhibited blood lipid profile within the age-specified range, but 15% lower mean HDL. This may suggest the role of HDL as modulator of immune system. Adequately powered longitudinal trials are needed to assess the effective relationship between atopic dermatitis and HDL lipoproteins in children. Method: Thirty-five children (17 M/18 F, mean age [SD]: 5.7 [3.9] years, range 1-14 years) with AD consecutively recruited at the Department of Pediatric, San Paolo Hospital, Milan, Italy, were enrolled in the present study. AD severity was graded by means of the SCORAD index. Patients with a SCORAD≤40 were defined as having mild to moderate AD, and those with SCORAD>40 as having severe AD. A single measurement of vitamin D [measured as 25(OH)D] was obtained from each patients using a chemiluminescent method. Student 0 s T tests for independent samples, and Pearson's and partial correlation coefficients were used to analyse the data. Results: Children with mild to moderate AD (n = 19) had a mean AE sd serum 25 (OH)D level of 20.7 AE 5.9 ng/mL, and children with severe AD (n = 16) a level of 21.5 AE 8.5 ng/mL, with no significant difference (p t-test = 0.757). The corresponding 25(OH)D mean levels were 20.6 AE 3.6 ng/mL and 17.5 AE 3.6 ng/mL in females (p t-test = 0.105), and 20.9 AE 9.0 ng/mL and 23.9 AE 9.8 ng/mL in males (p t-test = 0.538). The lack of association between serum 25(OH)D level and disease severity was independent from the season in which blood sample was collected. Person's correlation coefficients between serum 25(OH)D level and SCO-RAD were 0.03 (P = 0.849) overall, À0.397 (P = 0.103) among females, and 0.081 (P = 0.756) among males. After adjustment for season, the correlation coefficient was 0.019 (P = 0.917). Conclusion: 25(OH)D level is not associated to AD severity in our pediatric population, even after controlling for season. Background: Vitamin D levels are known to be associated with development of allergic diseases. However, existing data are controversial. The aim of this study was to investigate whether vitamin D levels are associated with food sensitisation (FS) in young children with atopic dermatitis (AD) Method: We performed a medical record review of all patients under 2 year presenting to pediatric allergic clinic in Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital for atopic dermatitis between March 1, 2012 and February 28, 2013 . Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) levels and six specific IgE to common food allergens were measured in 132 young children with AD. We defined vitamin D insufficiency was 25 (OH)D < 30 ng/mL, and FS as specific IgE ≥ 0.35 IU/mL to any of six common food allergens. Associations between serum 25(OH)D levels and FS were examined by using multiple logistic regression, adjusting for potential risk and confounding factors. Results: The mean age was 10.1 months. Among the 132 children with AD, 65.9% had FS. In this group, there was a negative correlation between 25(OH)D levels and serum eosinophil percentage,(correlation coefficient (r) = À0.335, P < 0.01) but not correlated with serum total IgE levels. Children with vitamin D insufficiency were more likely to have FS (adjusted odds ratio{aOR}, 17.1; 95% confidence interval {CI}, 1.36-215; P = 0.028) than those with adequate vitamin D levels. Conclusion: Vitamin D insufficiency is associated with food sensitisation in young children with AD. Further research is needed to confirm these findings. Background: The significant relationship between atopic dermatitis (AD) and some antioxidant nutrients was reported, suggesting that antioxidant nutrients may be more sensitive markers for AD compared with other micronutrients. The low level of vitamin D3 and coenzyme Q10 were previously observed in patients with bronchial asthma and may be connected with increased asthma severity. The aim of the study was to examine whether there are differences in the serum levels of vitamin D3, coenzyme Q10 and certain chosen parameters of inflammation status (C-reactive protein, white blood count-WBC, platelet count-PLT, red blood cell distribution width -RDW, mean platelet volume -MPV, eosinophil count -EO) between children with atopic dermatitis and without allergy symptoms. Method: Eighteen children with atopic dermatitis aged from 2 to 15 years (mean age 6 years) were enrolled into the study. The severity of AD was subsequently categorized into mild or moderate (<50 SCO-RAD points) and severe (>50 SCORAD points). The control group comprised of 20 children without symptoms of allergy aged 2-15 years (mean age 9 years). were decreased significantly in the serum of patients with severe AD, compared to children with mild and moderate AD (P < 0.03), but not to children without allergy. The levels of RDW, platelet count and eosinophil count were significantly elevated in group with severe AD vs moderate AD (P < 0.05, P < 0.02, P < 0.02) and control group (P < 0.02, P < 0.004, P < 0.0005). No changes were seen in CoQ10 levels. Conclusion: Our results suggest a possible contribution of AD exacerbation on low concentrations of vitamin D3 and provide rationale for its supplementation in this patient group. Background: It is thought that vitamin D deficiency has a role in atopic dermatitis (AD) pathogenesis but the debate whether it is protective or predisposing still continues. The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of vitamin D deficiency on AD development, severity and on related parameters. Method: To our study, 50 patients under the age of 2 who were diagnosed with AD according to Hanifin and Rajka criteria together with 50 healthy children were recruited. In addition to the demographic features of the patient and control groups, eosinophil, total IgE, specificIgE, prick test, IgG, IgM, IgA and 25(OH)D levels were evaluated. SpecificIgEor prick test positivity was considered asatopy. The level of 25(OH)D ≥ 30 ng/ml was accepted as sufficient, 21-29 ng/ml was accepted as insufficient and ≤20 ng/ml was accepted as deficient. The severity of the disease was assessed using SCORAD index. Results: There was no significant difference between the patient and control groups in terms of age, gender, duration or dose of vitamin D usage. The rate of atopy history in mothers was high in the patient group (P < 0.001). Among the patients, 56% was atopic and egg-white sensitivity had the highest frequency (36%). SCO-RAD index was higher in the atopic patients, especially in those with food sensitivity (P = 0.048). Vitamin D deficiency was detected as 22% in the patient group, and 4% in the healthy children (P = 0.028). No correlation between vitamin D deficiency and the severity or age of onset of the disease was detected (P > 0.05). Additional ectopic disease risk, eosinophil number and total IgE levels increased in the patient group as the level of vitamin D decreased. Patients with hypogammaglobulinemia were determined to be non-atopic and have lower SCORAD index comparedto patients with normogammaglobulinemia (P < 0.05). Conclusion: Vitamin D deficiency was determined to have a role in AD development. Vitamin D was shown to have no effect on the severity of the disease although it represses the increase of total IgE which increases the severity of the disease. The fact that vitamin D deficiency is concurrent with the additional atopic disease in our patients reveals the need for studies that investigate the effects of vitamin D on allergic march. Immunoallergological and skin microbiological profile of adolescents and adults patients with long term atopic dermatitis Background: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease involving skin barrier defects and immunologic deregulation. Skin of AD patients has increased susceptibility to infection by Staphylococci and Malassezia species. When persisting into adulthood AD tends to be more severe. Our aim was to characterise the immunoallergological and skin microbiological profile of adolescents and adults patients with long term AD. Method: A total of 79 patients, over 12 yo and previously diagnosed with AD were recruited and clinically evaluated by a dermatologist and an immunoallergologist. Patients presenting other immune mediated skin diseases were excluded. AD severity was evaluated through SCORAD. Serum total IgE, specific IgE to SA enterotoxins (A, C, B, TSST), Malassezia spp (Mspp), eosinophilic cationic protein (ECP) and respiratory Phadiatop â were determined (CAP-FEIA, Phadia â ). Microbiological identification and number of colonies of Staphylococcus spp (Sspp) and Staphylococcus aureus (SA) was obtained in cubital, popliteal and interscapular region in a 25 cm 2 area. Results: A total of 70 patients were enrolledmean age (SD) of 29.1 (11.4) yo, mean duration of disease (SD) of 16 (10.2) y, 41.4% male. SCORAD mean (SD) was 41.8 (24.1) 87.1% of patients had identification of SA spp and 67.1% of SA in at least one location, 63% had at least one positive spIgE to SA enterotoxin, 79% had positive Phadiatop â . Atopic patients had significant higher numbers of skin Sspp and SA (P = 0.001), specific IgE to SA enterotoxins and Mspp. There was a positive correlation between number of colonies of skin SA and ECP. Disease duration was positively and significantly correlated with serum total IgE, Phadiatop â and SA Staphylococcal enterotoxins A and TSST. Conclusion: In adult atopic dermatitis IgE sensitisation to microbial atgs (Malas spp) and superantigens (SSA 6 STT) is related to a long standing disease and significantly correlates with total and inhalant-specific IgE levels. This raises the hypothesis that reducing microbial colonisation in atopic dermatitis may have an impact on the polyclonal and allergen-specific IgE response. The human autoallergen thioredoxin induces more IL-13 and less IL-10 in immune cells from atopic dermatitis patients sensitised to Malassezia Background: Autoallergy is a phenomenon found in a subgroup of atopic dermatitis (AD) patients that mount specific IgE and T cell responses against autoantigens (autoallergens). One of these autoallergens is human thioredoxin (hTrx), a protein that shows high homology to the corresponding protein Mala s 13 from the skin-colonising yeast Malassezia sympodialis. Sensitisation to Malassezia sympodialis is specific to AD and sensitisation to hTrx could be induced due to the high cross-reactivity of Mala s 13 and hTrx. However, it is unknown why such an effective immune response is mounted against these proteins instead of maintaining tolerance especially towards hTrx. Method: We compared cytokine induction by Mala s 13 and hTrx in PBMCs, monocytes and CD4+ T cells via ELISA and RT-qPCR. Western blots were performed to identify the activated signalling pathways. Results: The expression and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines was induced in immune cells from AD patients as well as from control donors. Whereas the Th2 cytokine IL-13 was higher in supernatants from AD patients sensitised to Malassezia species, the anti-inflammatory IL-10 was reduced compared to non-sensitised AD patients or control donors. The main source of IL-10 were monocytes, which also produced pro-inflammatory cytokines such als IL-1b and upregulated expression of the inflammasome-associated molecule NLRP3. Stimulation with Mala s 13 and hTrx resulted in phosphorylation of NF-jB and the MAP-kinase p44/42 in PBMCs. Conclusion: Both Mala s 13 and hTrx are effective inducers of innate immune responses, which might be followed by activation of adaptive responses, such as Th1, Th2, Th17 and Th22, known to play a role in the pathogenesis of AD. That way sensitisation to Mala s 13 and hTrx could contribute to disease exacerbation in the affected patients, which also showed an impaired anti-inflammatory response towards both proteins. Background: It is known that S. aureus (SA) infects skin lesions in children with AD. But other staphylococci can be also found on skin lesions. The work aimed at studying the specificity of skin colonisation with different staphylococci in children with AD. Method: The study enrolled 88 patients with AD in active phase and 5 patients with contact dermatitis (CD). The patients were averagely aged 4.2 (2 months-17 years). We mostly observed children with acute forms among which erythematosquamous forms occurred twice as often as erythematosquamous forms with lichenization did (in 58.6 and 27.6%), 3 patients (3.5%) were with exudative elements and 9 patients (10.34%) had a lichenoid form. We identified 21 patients (23.9%) with mild, 43 patients (48.9%) with moderate (48.9%) and 24 (27.3%) with severe AD. The skin smear seeding was performed on blood agar. The isolates obtained were identified according to the conventional microbiological tests. The staphyl. types were identified and their antibiotic sensitivity was tested by means of the automated microbiology analyzer 'Walka-way 96 plus', Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Germany. Results: SA and S. epidermidis (SE) were found to be the most often isolated strains. We detected SA in 43 cases (42.16%) and 13 of them were patients with severe AD, whereas SE was found in 31 (30.39%) cases with 7 severe patients (25.93%) in the group. Thirteen patients (12.75%) demonstrated no bacterial formation. In 10 cases we isolated the following coagulasenegative staphyl. strains (CNS): S. haemolyticus, S. warneri, S. hominis, S. saprophyticus and S. sciuri. No difference between SA or CNS presence and AD severe forms was recorded. CNS were more frequently revealed in acute AD, while SAequally in chronic AD with lichenization and acute AD (P = 0.081). All strains were penicillin-resistant. Eight in 29 SE strains, 1 in 4 S. haemol. and S. sciuri were oxacilin-resistant. While observing the oxacilin-resistant strains behavior we detected 3 SE strains and 1 S. aciuri strain after SA eradication in cases with moderate AD and 2 S. haemol. Strains after Acinetobacter baumanii and Streptococcus pneum. eradication in cases with severe AD. Among patients with CD 2 cases showed no bacterial formation, while the other 3 demonstrated the growth of S. haemol., SE and S. hominis. Conclusion: Therefore, CNS play a certain role in developing AD and their enterotoxin-producing properties ascertained in our previous studies call for further research into their impact on disease progression. Cell-cell contact dependent inhibition of IgE-production by CD8 positive T cells in patients with extrinsic atopic dermatitis or augmentation in hyper-IgE-patients Background: CD8 pos T cells are able to exert regulatory as well as helper T cell function. Data in mice and men suggested an inhibitory role in IgE-production. Others have shown, however, that CD8 pos T cells can augment IgE-production. We now asked whether their depletion from human PBMC results in elevated or in reduced IgE-levels ex vivo. Method: Ficoll-isolated PBMC from patients with exacerbated intrinsic atopic dermatitis, iAD n = 6, with extrinsic AD/ atopy syndrome: eAD, <10 000 kU/l total serum IgE n = 28, >10 000 kU/l n = 14, and healthy controls: HC n = 6 were depleted of CD8 pos cells using antibody coated magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec). 5 9 10 5 cells/1.8 ml round bottom cryovial were incubated for 10d. Conditions:: (i) all PBMC, (ii) PBMC w/o CD8 pos cells, (iii) PBMC CD8-depleted and subsequently reconstituted with CD8 pos cells. IgE-levels were determined in cell free supernatants using the ImmunoCap system (low rage level, Phadia). Results: Reduction of CD8 pos T cells resulted in elevated IgE-levels as compared to all PBMC in 45% of eAD patients. CD8-reconstitution reversed this phenomenon. IgE-production remained constant in 19% or was reduced in 36% of eAD. In iAD or HC, no significant IgE-production was induced by CD8-depletion. In eADpatients with less or more than 10 000 kU/ l serum IgE, CD8-reduction augmented IgE production ex vivo in 6/28 (21%) or in 9/14 cases (65%). We then focused on patients where CD8-reduction elevated IgE. Whereas in mice cell-cell contact is essential for this CD8-mediated effect, this was unclear in humans. Therefore, in 6 eAD-patients cells were seeded as described, however, now in 24 transwell flat bottom plates (Corning, 6.5 mm transwell inserts). Additional condition: (iv) CD8-depleted PBMC (lower transwell chamber) and CD8 pos cells (upper chamber). Here, preventing cell-cell contact abandoned most CD8-mediated IgE-regulation. Conclusion: (i) In the majority of eAD, CD8-reduction elevated IgE ex vivo. IgE-controlling mechanisms ex vivo by CD8 pos T cells depended, at least in part, on T-B cell contact. (ii) In a minority (19% of eAD), CD8depletion had no effect suggesting no role for CD8 pos CTL in IgE-control in this group. (iii) In some eAD-patients, CD8reduction reduced IgE-levels significantly. This was pronounced in AD-patients with very high total serum IgE-levels. The inhibitory role of CD8 pos T cells seems to be supplanted by a helper function which facilitates IgE-production in these individuals. Increased vigilance in children with atopic dermatitis (AD) and/or attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is based on disturbed intracellular granule biology W€ olfer, W 1 ; Krauel, K 2 ; Bonnekoh, B 1 ; R€ ottger, U 2 ; Flechtner, H 2 ; Gollnick, H 1 ; Ambach, A 1 1 Clinic for Dermatology and Venereology, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany; 2 Clinic for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany Background: Skin, mucosa, brain and immune system are linked by function. Up-regulated vigilance in AD-skin is known to be caused in part by disturbed intracellular granule mechanisms in several cell systems resulting in often insufficient reactions to external stimulation. We now investigated in AD-children reactions of the CNS requiring sustained granule release. Likewise, ADHD-patients unable to keep up an enduring CNS-response were tested for granule release velocity in peripheral immune cells. Method: Fourteen confirmed ADHDinpatients, 11 sex-and age-matched AD-children and 8 healthy individuals (HI) without any atopic/psychiatric background were studied in 3 modules. A Dermato-allergology: Erlanger Atopie Score (EAS), SCORAD, prick test with common aero allergens; B child psychiatry: short and long term attentiveness (S/LTA) using a computerbased test battery as well as various qestionnaires; C laboratory: total serum IgE, eosinophilic cationic protein (ECP), WBC, and release velocity (i) of perforin-granules from CD8 pos Tcells and (ii) of CD63 pos secretory lysosomes from basophilis quantified by flow cytometry. Results: Module A) 12/14 ADHD-children did not have any AD-symptoms nor any history of atopy, 13/14 showed a white dermographism, EAS was 9 AE 3 (atopic skin diathesis unclear). 5/11 AD-patients had exacerbated disease (SCORAD > 10, EAS 12 AE 3). Module B) STA: AD-and ADHD-children reacted significantly slower with more mistakes than HI. LTA: AD-children showed prolonged reaction times and slowed down even more over time as compared to HI, but did not make as many errors as ADHD-patients. Module C) ADHD-and AD-children had elevated (i) IgE levels (500 AE 420 kU/l and 653 AE 950 kU/l), (ii) eosinophils (8.7 AE 9% and 7.7 AE 6%) and (iii) ECP levels (31 AE 30 and 39 AE 33). AD-and ADHD-patients released cytotoxic granules, and upregulated CD63 on basophils, significantly faster and more complete as HI (P < 0.05). Conclusion: AD represents an independent risk factor for ADHD. Our data suggest a cell biological basis for this phenomenon. Results in allertness tests are consistent with the hypothesis of pan-cellular granule alterations in AD/atopy as a basis of the well known increased vigilance mechanisms of skin, immune and nervous systems. Altered granule transport mechanisms in ADHD open new insights into ADHDpathophysiology. Since perforin is involved in IgE-control, the perforin-defect in these patients may contribute to their increased susceptibility for atopy. Background: It is known that eczema is occasionally associated with phenylketonuria. Here we present an infant with phenylketonuria who admitted to our outpatient department because of persistent eczema and consequently diagnosed as atopic dermatitis and cow's milk allergy. Case: Six-month old girl with phenylketonuria was admitted to our outpatient department with eczema in her cheek and body since she was 2-month-old. She was fed with breast milk and formula without phenylalanine but sometimes she was fed with formula containing milk. Her eczema was aggravated when she was fed with formula or food containing milk. Skin prick test was positive with egg white (3 9 3 mm of wheal) but negative to cow's milk. Egg-white specific (s) IgE was 0.89 kU/l and cow's milk sIgE was 1.99 kU/l. Egg and cow's milk were completely eliminated in her and her mother's diet and then her eczema was significantly improved. After elimination diet, oral food challenge test with cow's milk was performed when she was eighteen-month-old. She had dry cough, wheezing and persistent repetitive vomiting after 40 min of challenge test. She was treated with intramuscular epinephrine, methylprednisolone and inhaled salbutamol and her symptoms resolved within an hour. Conclusion: Eczema may accompany metabolic diseases such as phenylketonuria. Although rare, in case of persistent and/or severe eczema with metabolic diseases, concomitant food allergy should be kept in mind and additional diagnostic tests should be made. Background: The link between atopy and contact delayed type sensitisation has always intrigued researchers and clinicians. Both atopic dermatitis (AD) and contact dermatitis are inflammatory skin diseases; however they do not share common pathophysiological pathways. The aim of this paper is to find if contact sensitisation is more common in subjects with atopic dermatitis. Method: We recruited 31 adult patients with mild-to-moderate AD and corresponding number healthy volunteers. Patch testing with European baseline series was performed in all subjects in addition to skin biophysical measurementstransepidermal water loss (TEWL) and stratum corneum hydration (SCH). Results: No difference between both groups in the number of positive subjects could be found (P > 0.05). However, the total number of positive reactions was twice higher in AD than in healthy volunteers. Gender and skin phototype did not differ between patch positive and negative subjects. The most common allergens were nickel, preservatives and parahenylenediamine. AD patients had increased TEWL and decreased SCH even in clinically uninvolved areas. Conclusion: We add knowledge from this in vivo study on the role of atopy in contact sensitisation. Herein, the role of epidermal barrier impairment for the development of delayed type reactions is discussed. The false positive patch reactions in AD are an argument that we address when focusing contact hypersensitivity in AD. Background: The relationship between atopic eczema (AE) and contact dermatitis represents an unsolved and insufficiently discussed issue. Traditionally, AE patients have been considered as having a decreased frequency of contact sensitisation and allergic contact dermatitis. However, the prevalence of contact sensitivity in AE patients has been high in some reports. Elucidating the true frequency of this association should be important for the appropriate management of eczema patients. We will review the state of knowledge concerning this issue and present our results of patch testing in AE patients. Method: Ninety three consecutive patients with AE from 15 to 66 years were patch tested with the Extended International Standard Series and selected allergens from preservatives, medicaments and cosmetics. Results: Forty-two patients (39%) had one or more positive allergic reactions. The most common allergens were nickel sulfate, fragrance mix, neomycin, cobalt chloride thiuram mix, balsam of Peru and potassium dichromate. Twenty three (25%) reacted to topical preparations, among these, 7 (7.5%) reacted to topical steroids, including hydrocortisone-17 hydroxybutyrate, tixocortol pivalate and clobetasol. Contact sensitisation was more frequent among patients with severe and long lasting AE. Conclusion: The study demonstrated the importance of contact sensitivity as a concomitant or aggravating factor of the clinical dermatitis in atopic patients. We recommend that routine patch testing should be included in the diagnostic workup of AE patients, especially those with severe and refractory disease. Introduction: Allergic cheilitis to lipcare stick is well-known, particularly with balsam of Peru. We report 2 cases of allergic cheilitis from a lipstick due to a so far unknown other allergen, Polysilicone-15 (Parsol â SLX), a UVB sunscreen agent. Methods: A 14-yo girl and an 83-yo male presented with acute cheilitis, extending around to the peri-oral skin. They had been using a lipcare stick (Dermophil â ) several times a day for 2 months because of chapped lips. Patch tests (PT) were performed on their backs with the European baseline series and their own cosmetics, with two readings on D3 and D4. Both of them also had subsequent PT with the 10 ingredients of the stick provided by the manufacturer. Results: Both patients had a positive reaction to the lipstick (++/++) and the girl also had a fragrance mix I (++/++) and nickel (+/+) reaction, both with previous relevance. Among the lipstick ingredients, Parsol â SLX showed a positive reaction in both patients (+++/+++). As no previous report of allergic contact dermatitis from this sunscreen agent could be found in the literature, we wondered if the manufacturer had not mistaken it for Parsol MCX i.e. ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate, which is a well-known allergen. After performing the necessary checks, the manufacturer confirmed that the true name was Parsol SLX and sent us another sample. The two patients had subsequent PT with the second sample of Parsol SLX and the sunscreen agents series as well. The only positive patch test in both patients was Parsol SLX. Conclusion: To our knowledge, we report the first cases of allergic contact dermatitis to the sunscreen agent Parsol SLX. It is a macromolecule which spreads and is expected to remain on the cutaneous surface. The occurrence of sensitisation with such a macromolecule is surprising. Nevertheless copolymers, also used in cosmetics, may be responsible for allergic contact dermatitis and it has been suggested that impurities may be the culprit allergens. Mart ın Iglesias, MA; Mur Gimeno, P Hospital Santa B arbara, Puertollano, Ciudad Real, Spain Background: Corticosteroids are potent anti-inflammatory and inmunomodulatory agents used in the treatment of various inflammatory diseases including allergic ones. Different case reports of immediate or delayed hypersensitivity have been described in the literature. Method: A 63 year-old woman with perinasal seborrheic dermatitis attended to external consults of Allergy referring generalised facial erithema and edema with intense burning sensation, after 2 days using Lexxema (topical metilprednisolone). She was treated with oral deflazacort presenting flare-up reaction at previously affected skin sites, compatible with facial erythroderma. The reaction was resolved in 10 days with antihistamines. She had applied topical corticosteroids previously with good tolerance. Results: We performed patch tests with corticosteroids set and Lexxema cream, resulting positive with Lexxema and budesonida in D2 and D4. Intense eccematous bullous lesions were observed. Patch test with Deflazacort resulted negative. Oral provocation test was not performed, because of the severity of the reaction. Prick and oral provocation test with Prednisone and Dexametasone resulted negative. Open application test with Prednicarbate was negative. Conclusion: We present a case of severe extended allergic contact dermatitis to topical metilprednisolone, confirmed with positive patch test. The lessions flared up with oral deflazacort. Literature describes that systemic contact dermatitis is due to oral re-exposure in individuals sensitisated after using topical corticosteroids, as primary systemic sensitisation to corticosteroids is uncommon. We must continue with oral and epicutaneous provocation tests with corticosteroids different groups to complete the sensitisation/tolerance profile. Background: The benzoyl peroxide is an usual and effective treatment for the inflammatory acne. In different diseases or occupational exposures have been described sensitisation to benzoyl peroxide, although in cases of patients with acne is rare. Method: We describe 4 cases of allergic contact dermatitis with benzoyl peroxide. In all cases after the exposure to benzoyl peroxide, present areas with eczema, papules or vesicles. Patch tests for Spanish standard series and benzoyl peroxide 1% in petrolatum in all patient and patch with propylene glycol 2% (patient 1), clindamycin (patient 2) and dental battery (patient 3), according to the standards of GEIDC with readings at 48 and 96 h were performed. Patch tests in 20 healthy control patients were carried out, to discard the irritating effect. Results: Patch testing in all 4 patients were positive to benzoyl peroxide 1% at 48 and 96 h and the intensity were (1+) patient 3, (2+) patients 2 and 4, and (3+) patient 4. In 20 controls patients the same pacth test was negative at both 48 and 96 h. This fact would be an evidence of this concentration of benzoyl peroxide is not irritative Conclusion: We present 4 cases of allergic contact dermatitis with benzoyl peroxide, whose probable principal mechanism would be a late sensitisation to benzoyl peroxide used for treatment of acne. We believe that the frequency of reactions of benzoyl peroxide in patients with acne, due to a sensitisation, could be higher of estimated until now. The current practice is to consider that these reactions are due to an irritative effect of the drug with its consequent avoidance and without performing studies to demonstrate or to discard a sensitisation to benzol peroxide. We advocate to perform patch tests to benzoyl peroxide in patients with skin reactions to benzoyl peroxide and in healthy controls to discard, definetely, the irritable effect of this topic compound. Introduction: Allergic contact reactions according to hair dyes arrise mostly due to the sensitisation of para-phenylenediamine (PPD). PPD a derivative of p-nitroanaline is widely used as an oxidizable hair dye and also found in black henna tattoo. PPD causes local as well as systemic toxic effects when applied topically and/or ingested. Subsequent exposure PPD may lead to delayed type-IV hipersensitivity reaction manifesting as acute allergic dermatitis. We present a 15-year old girl with delayed hipersensitivity reactions after first exposure to hair dye who have been found to be sensitised before by a black henna tatto to PPD. Case: A 15-year-old girl was admitted to emergency department with a history of neck and facial swelling 3 days after the first hair dye has been made. Her physical examination was normal except for severe edema which beginning from neck extending to the ear, eyelids, forehead and scalp and a slight eczamatous reaction limited to frontal hair line was present The patient also had medical history of allergic contact dermatitis after use of temporary black henna tattoo before 3 years. We started peroral 1 mg/kg metilprednisolone and second generation H1 antihistaminic treatment. The patient was patch tested with European standart series after the neck and facial edema recovered completely. A strong positive reaction (+++) to PPD was observed. Patient was informed about avoid hair dye products and black henna tattoo that may contain PPD or para-dye ingredients. We provide a list of products that may contain PPD to the patient. Conclusion: Para phenylenediamine is a potential danger especially for children and adeloscents because of increasing use hair dye and temporary henna tattoo in this age group. Physicians and parents should be informed about the risk of hair dyes and tattoos that contain PPD and laws should prevent its use in different hair dye formulations and tattoos. Emergency physicians must be aware of possibility of allergic contact dermatitis from hair dyes and temporary henna tattoos. Quinine-induced contact dermatitis Maghfour Martín, Y; Alvarado Arenas, M; Ahmida, T; Garc ıa Ponce, JF; Porcel Carreño, S; Jim enez Tim on, S; Hern andez Arbeiza, FJ Virgen de la Montaña Hospital, C aceres, Spain Background: Quinine is an alkaloid obtained from the cinchona bark. It has antipyretic, antimalarial and analgesic properties. It has been widely used as a treatment for different pathologies and as a hair strengthener in various cosmetic products. Given its scarce use in the last years, quinine is currently considered an uncommon allergen. Method: A 33-year-old woman diagnosed with allergic rhinoconjunctivitis due to pollens presents with symptoms of scalp pruritus and bullous lesions with serous exudate that resolved with application of topical steroids for 3 days. No previous similar episodes reported. She related the symptoms with the application of a shampoo and serum used regularly for the past 3 months. Allergy study included patch testing with standard battery (Stallergenes), cosmetics battery (BIAL Aristegui), shampoo and serum (supplied by the patient) and 25% Quinine Sulfate (BIAL Aristegui). Results: Intense skin reaction (++++) at 48-72-96 h with shampoo, serum and 25% Quinine Sulfate. Conclusion: We report a case of quinineinduced contact dermatitis. Despite being an uncommon allergen, it is important to be considered and included in the study of patients with scalp eczema so as to reach an adequate diagnosis. Background: Transdermal nitroglycerin (NT) patch is cause of irritant contact dermatitis, contact dermatitis, urticaria, and widespread cutaneous reactions. Incidence of allergic contact dermatitis is small and usually local. The risk of systemic contact dermatitis after an oral administration is extremelly low, but exist. Most patients that present contact dermatitis to nitroglycerin tolerated oral and sublingual preparations. Method: A 77 year-old female used transdermal NT patch (Nitro-Dur â ) as treatment for stable angina. After 1 year of treatment she presented erythema, pruritus and vesicles at the application site. Because of that, it was started a new treatment with another patch brand (Minitran â ) which was good tolerated for the first 3 weeks. After that time, erythema, pruritus and vesicles reappeared at the application site. The skin lesions resolved within a month after she discontinued the treatment. Allergy study: Patient was tested with skin patch tests with Nitro-Dur â , Minitran â , NT 0.2% in petrolatum, NT 1% in petrolatum, Solinitrin â and the patch components: rosin, turpentine, epoxy resin, ptertiary-butyl-phenol formaldehyde resin (PTB resin), urethane dimethacrylate, hydroxypropyl methacrylate, methyl methacrylate and glycerine. Results: Skin patch tests were positive with Nitro-Dur â , Minitran â and NT 1% in petrolatum. Skin patch tests were negative with rosin, turpentine, epoxy resin, PTB resin, urethane dimethacrylate, hydroxypropyl methacrylate, methyl methacrylate, glycerine, Solinitrin â and NT 0.2% in petrolatum. Controlled, single blind, challenge test with sublingual nitroglycerin (Trinispray) was negative. Conclusion: We present a case of contact dermatitis to nitroglycerin from transdermal systems. Patch testing (NT 1% petrolatum) may be helpful for diagnosis. In these patients, other pharmaceutical forms must be tested to check the tolerance in order to prevent complications for cardiopathology treatment in the future. Background: Allergic contact dermatitis to textile dyes is considered to be a rare phenomenon. Allergy prevalence to disperse dyes round between 0.4 and 6.7%. Method: A 32-year-old female, with no allergy clinical records, was referred to our Center. She suffered itching lesions coinciding with swimsuit area within 3 h after outdoor swimming. The patient dressed a new orange bikini and did not use sunscreen protection. No previous problems with other clothes were referred, whatever its colour. Clinical examination disclosed erythematous-desquamative lesions located on buttocks and mammary area, just drawing the bikini. Oral antihistaminic and topic corticosteroids treatment were successfully administered. Results: Patch tests were performed with standard series of Spanish Contact Dermatitis Group (GEIDAC) and textile series (Bial-Aristegui Labs.): positive PPD (3+), and Disperse Orange3 (DO3) 1% (3+) within 48 and 96 h. Conclusion: Disperse dyes, (mainly azo) are the most common causes of textilerelated allergic contact dermatitis. They are used for dyeing synthetic fibers, not for natural ones. Disperse dyes do not chemically bond to the fibers, and their small, liophilic molecules can therefore easily migrate onto the skin of the person who is wearing the garment, especially if the textile fastness is poor; they may be removed by exposure to water. This circumstance could explain why our patient presented dermatitis after bathing and not with regular clothes even orange-colored ones. Cross-reactivity between PPD and DO3, among other textile dyes, has frequently been reported. Asking after patch-test results, our patient referred previous dermatitis related a henna tattoo. This might be the primary sensitisation. Identifying the allergens when contact dermatitis suspected is challenging because despite the European legislation, clothing labels have no declaration on textile dyes. Results: There were no positive reaction to patch test in 405 patients. Among 27 allergens which were detected positive, first 5 of them were nickel (n:117), cobalt (n:27), fragnance mix (n:16), parabens mix (n:13), and propolis (n:13), respectively. Positive reactions to 8 allergens were less than 2% in total. Conclusion: Because of industrial development, allergic diseases and health care costs are increasing year after year. Skin patch testing is the gold standard in the diagnosis of ACD. After a complete medical history (complaints, professions, hobbies, etc.) , and physical exam, clinician should concerned with the cost-effectiveness and physicians can apply patch tests involving less allergens. This application will also reduce the risk of sensitisation to new allergens, that the patients have never met before. Introduction: Occupational diseases due to IgE-mediated allergy to Anisakis simplex have been described. The main clinical manifestation associated with this disease is bronchial asthma and exceptionally generalised urticaria and protein contact dermatitis. Material and methods: We report the case of a 24-year-old woman who had been working for the last 5 years in a fish market. In the last 3 months, she referred hives, erythema and itching on hands and forearms when she had direct contact with the water where she washed fish and seafood. She tolerated the ingestion of fish and seafood. Skin prick test with a battery of pneumoallergens (dust house mites, pollens, moulds and dander), fish (tuna, cod, sole, hake, sardine, anchovy and red mullet), seafood (prawn, clam, squid and mussel) and Anisakis simplex were performed. Serum specific IgE (CAP-Phadia) levels against fish, seafood and Anisakis simplex were investigated. Results: Skin prick test with common pneumoallergens, fish and seafood were negative. The results were positive with Anisakis simplex (papule of 6 9 8 mm). Serum specific IgE levels against Anisakis simplex, fish and seafood were undetectable. Conclusion: We describe a case of occupational contact urticaria caused by sensiti-sation to Anisakis simplex in a fishmonger. The symptoms referred by the patient and the results of skin prick test support the diagnosis. However, further investigations should be done to confirm these finds. To our knowledge, similar cases to ours have not been previously reported. Id reactions as an autoeczematization to diaper dermatitis complicated by cutaneous candidiasis case report Case report: A 1 month healthy old boy was seen in consultations for erythematous, scaly, macerated plaques with edema, vesicles and pustules in the diaper area (gluteal area, perineum, groin, and genitalia) and clusters of pustules and vesicles on a large erythematous base over the dorsal area of both hands. Direct examination with KOH 10% of a swab taken from the diaper area confirmed the presence of pseudohyphae and was repeatedly negative from the dorsum of the hands. Isolation of Candida strains in Sabouraud dextrose agar media was obtained. No associated bacterial infection with Streptococcus sp., Staphylococcus sp was evidenced. A daily bath in a lukewarm water with an irritant-free and fragrancefree soap, drying softly with a cotton towel, topical application of a cream composed of nistatin, neomycin and triamcinolon twice daily for 7 days were followed by complete healing of all lesions. Discussion : Id reactions or hypersensitivity reactions, have been described as secondary lesions in different dermatologic diseases, mostly: atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, scabies, chronic otitis externa, and especially dermatophyte infections. The clinical picture of id reactions is so vast creating, sometimes, difficulties in recognizing them. All type of skin elementary lesions can be present, simple or grouped, erythema, papules, vesicles, pustules, in a symmetric or non-symmetric distribution, disseminated or localised. Classically id reactions are known to be caused by type 4 delayed hypersensitivity to a distant focus of any type of infection. Id reactions are not drug-induced allergic reactions and not required antihistamines or steroids, although these reactions may be widespread and intensely pruritic. Id reactions are caused by a large spectrum of various fungal, bacterial, viral, and parasitic infections, but no infectious agent is detected from the id reactions and the symptoms resolve after treatment of primary lesion. Temporary henna tattooing has been very popular amog children. Henna (Lawsonia inermis) is a plant from the Lythraceae family. Henna is often used with other coloring substances such as para-phenylenediaminen (PPD). PPD intensifies dark color and makes the tattoo last longer. It has high allergenity and may cause contact dermatit. We report a 14 year old boy who developed allergic contact bullous dermatit after having the name his girl friend on his forearm. Our patient was patch tested with European Standard series which investigated 28 allergens. Strong positive reaction (++++) to PPD was observed in our patient's patch test. Patient was informed about avoid black henna tattoo that may contain PPD or para-dye ingredients. We provide a list of products that may contain PPD to the patient. The lesion was partially resolved with systemic steoid, antihistaminic and topical steroid therapy. Background: The skin prick test (SPT) is a standard method in allergy diagnostics. In the daily routine, the use of conventional metal prick lancets was compared with a novel multiple allergen applicator, for patients aged below 18 years and for adults. Method: In suspected cases of allergy and suitability for testing (71 children/adolescents, aged 5-17; 273 adults, aged 18-67) a SPT was performed pursuant to the German guideline for skin tests (Ru€ eff F et al. 2010) using metal prick lancets on one forearm and CLUSTO-Prick (ROXALL Medizin, Germany) on the other, each involving two controls and six different allergen extracts. Patients or accompanying persons were asked for sensation of pain, satisfaction and recommendation. The mean wheal diameters were documented as negative (=0 mm), doubtful (<3 mm) or positive (≥3 mm) test results. Identical or divergent assessments were determined for the non-negative results (doubtful or positive in at least one system). Labour and working time for both systems were compared by the physicians on a 5-point rating scale (À2 to +2). Results: The sensation of pain using CLU-STO-Prick compared with using lancets was lower or equal in 76.1% respectively 19.7% of children/adolescents and 71.1% respectively 23.8% of adults. Of all children/adolescents 85.9% were more and 11.3% equally satisfied with CLUSTO-Prick, of adults 91.6% respectively 6.6%. The rates of recommendation were 95.8% and 98.5%, respectively. Of the non-negative results (n = 95 for children/adolescents; n = 425 for adults) 94.7% respectively 97.2% were identical in both test systems. Much less labour and working time was rated by the majority of physicians in favour of CLU-STO-Prick, and more distinct test results. Conclusion: The multiple allergen applicator CLUSTO-Prick is beneficial for patients of both age groups reflected by less sensation of pain, more satisfaction, distinct test results and reduction of working time to perform a skin prick test. Background: The skin prick test is a standard method in allergy diagnostics. For adults, the use of metal prick lancets was compared in the daily routine with a multiple allergen applicator. Method: In suspected cases of allergy and suitability for testing (273 adults, aged 18-67) a skin prick test was performed pursuant to the German guideline for skin tests (Ru€ eff F et al. 2010 ) by use of metal prick lancets on one and CLUSTO-Prick (ROX-ALL Medizin, Germany) on the other forearm. Non-negative test results in both systems were classified by the mean wheal diameters for three allergens (grass mix, n = 156; birch, n = 109; D. pteronyssinus, n = 77) as negative (0 mm), doubtful (<3 mm) or positive (≥3 mm, subdivided 1+ to 4+). Identical or divergent assessments and the final statements (negative in only one system, doubtful, positive as summarized) were determined. Sensation of pain, satisfaction and recommendation were compared for male (n = 142, mean age 36.7) and female (n = 131, mean age 35.1) patients. Results: The classifications of non-negative test results were equal or higher in favour of CLUSTO-Prick in 63.5% respectively 35.2% for grass mix, in 64.2% respectively 34% for birch and in 63.6% respectively 32.5% for D. pteronyssinus. The final statements were equal in 100% for grass mix, 95.4% for birch and 96.1% for D. pteronyssinus. In one case for birch allergen the result with the lancet was negative and with CLUSTO-Prick positive, with a positive anamnesis. The sensation of pain using CLUSTO-Prick compared with using lancets was in 72.6% lower for male and 69.5% for female adults. Ninety-three pecent of men were more satisfied with CLUSTO-Prick and 90.1% of women. The rates of recommendation by males and females for the novel system were 98.6% and 98.5%, respectively. Conclusion: The use of multiple allergen applicator CLUSTO-Prick compared to conventional prick lancets is beneficial inde-pendent of the kind of allergens tested in this evaluation and of the gender of adults. In vivo anti-inflammatory effect of H1 antihistamines in patients with allergic rhinitis Background: Allergic rhinitis is a chronic, IgE mediated inflammatory disease of nasal mucosa. H1 antihistamines represent a therapeutic option in all forms of allergic rhinitis. They reduce the specific symptoms of allergic rhinitis, but some compounds may also reduce the chronic inflammation of nasal mucosa. We evaluated the serum level of some cytokines involved in inflammatory process in patients with persistent allergic rhinitis (PAR) before and after 4week treatment with H1 antihistamines. Method: Eighty-five patients with PAR, mean age 29.91 AE 9.92 years were included in the study. The patients were under treatment with Desloratadine (Des) 5 mg/day (41pts) or Levocetirizine (Lev) 5 mg/day (44pts) for 4 weeks. The patients were clinically and biologically evaluated before and after the treatment. There were noticed rhinitis symptoms (presence and severity), type of sensitisation (indoor or outdoor allergens), serum levels of total IgE and eosinophils counts, serum level of IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8 and TNF-a. Results: Patients with PAR presented high levels of total IgE, eosinophils, IL-8 and TNF-a compared to healthy volunteers. Both antihistamines reduce all the symptoms of allergic rhinitis, including nasal congestion, Lev being more effective on nasal congestion compared to Des (P = 0.05). H1 antihistamines reduce the serum level of IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8 and TNF-a after 4 weeks of treatment. The reduction of cytokines was not influenced by the duration or severity of rhinitis and the type of sensitisation. The reduction of IL-1b and IL-8 was more significant in Les group compared to Des group (P = 0.048, respectively P = 0.024). Conclusion: Lev and Des as a prolonged therapy reduce systemic allergic inflammation present in patients with PAR. Lev has a better effect in decreasing the symptoms and serum cytokines. The aim of our study was to compare the effect of fexofenadine (F) vs ceterizine (C) on skin prick test (SPT). Method: Sixty atopic patients divided in three groups were enrolled. SPT were performed before and after 24 h from the administration either of 180 mg F or 10 mg C, and placebo (P) in a double-blind placebo-controlled study. The area of edema was measured 20 min after SPT and expressed as square mm. Percent of the inhibition of histamine and allergens induced effect, after treatment, was calculated from the values estimated at baseline. Results: A significant reduction of histamine edema area was obtained in 12 patients who received F (61%) vs patients who received C (6pts, 30%) or P (5 pts, 25%). Allergens edema area were also significantly reduced in all patients who received F (20 pts, 100%) vs 13 patients (66%) who received C or 5 patients with P (25%). Conclusion: Fexofenadine was more efficient in reducing the edema induced by allergen than the edema induced by histamine. Fexofenadine is more efficient than ceterizine in reducing the edema and flare of SPT to histamine and allergens after 24 h from administration. Methods: An electronic medical records review of grass pollen AIT prescriptions (ATC code: V01AA02) written for >6000 pedaitric allergic rhinitis patients from 2005 to 2012 was conducted using IMS Disease Analyzer. Pediatric patients were defined as <18 years of age. Administration modality was determined by the first prescription identified during each prescribing year (September-August). Results: The pediatric population use of SLIT-tablets has increased from 9% of total AIT initiations in 2008 to 25% of total AIT initiations in 2009 with the same level in the following years. The average age for AIT initiation was 12.1 years (SD 3.24). Within the pediatric population, the largest prescribers of SIT were pediatric and ENT specialists (together accounting for 65% of prescriptions). The largest prescribers of SLIT-tablets were ENT specialists (43%). Pediatricians were the leading prescribers of SCIT, with >80% of their patients initiating AIT with SCIT (in the overall study period and for those initiating treatment most recently in 2012). Conclusion: The majority of pediatric AIT patients are receiving SCIT despite availability of SLIT-tablets in Germany. Although the SLIT-tablet may be a more convenient treatment option, providers may prefer to prescribe SCIT rather than a single allergen tablet for children who experience sensitivities to multiple allergens. Background: Sublingual allergen immunotherapy for grass pollen-induced allergy became available in tablet form in Germany in 2006. We examined annual prescription trends for sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) tablets and subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT) for grass polleninduced allergy in Germany. Methods: Electronic medical record review of grass pollen allergy immunotherapy prescriptions (ATC code: V01AA02) written for >18 000 allergic rhinitis patients (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) was conducted using IMS Disease Analyzer. Administration modality was determined by first prescription identified during each prescribing year (Sep-Aug). Results: SCIT prescriptions generally occurred in two peaks, with annual first prescriptions occurring in Sep-Oct and again in January. SLIT-tablets analyzed as single modality did not have a clear annual peak indicating various time points of initiation. Analysis of specific SLIT-tablet products was performed to account for product specific prescribing instructions. When analyzed by product it was noted that SQ-standardised grass SLIT-tablet, GRAZAX â (Phleum pratense 75 000 SQ-T/2,800 BAU, ALK, Denmark) had a clear peak in first prescriptions in Sep-Nov of the prescribing year, similar to SCIT patterns but of lower magnitude (Figure 1 ). The 300IR 5-grass SLIT-tablet (Oralair), indicated for pre-co season treatment, had highest peak of first prescriptions in Jan-Mar of each prescribing year; however, a second peak indicated a large proportion of patients received first 5-grass SLIT-tablet prescription in the Sep-Dec period. This finding was supported by sensitivity analysis, which examined timing of prescriptions during the prescribing season. Conclusion: Investigation into the timing of prescriptions during the treatment year (Sep-Aug) revealed that: The first prescription of SCIT within a prescribing year generally occurred in the autumn. For SLIT-tablets there was a biphasic trend in first prescriptions with some variation between products. Background: Sublingual allergen immunotherapy (AIT) for grass pollen allergies in tablet form became available in Germany in 2006. This study examined the impact of the introduction of sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) tablets on prescribing of subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT) and SLIT drops over time in Germany. Method: An electronic medical records review of grass pollen AIT prescriptions (ATC code: V01AA02) written for >18 000 allergic rhinitis patients from 2005 to 2012 was conducted using IMS Disease Analyzer. Administration modality was determined by the first prescription identified during each prescribing year (September-August). McNemar's test was used to evaluate prescribing trends over the study period for the total patient population and age subgroups. Results: Nearly all patients (96%) with grass AIT prescriptions in study year 1 (2005/2006) were prescribed SCIT with greatest AIT use generally among adults (61% of prescriptions), with pediatric patients (<18 years) accounting for 39% of AIT prescriptions. A statistically significant increase in the proportion of patients prescribed SLIT-tablets was observed, from 8% (2006/07) to 29% (2011/12) (P < 0.001). The proportion of patients prescribed SCIT therapies declined from 87% to 67% (P < 0.001), while use of SLIT-drops was rare (~4% of patients annually) from 2006/ 07 to 2011/12. Similar trends were observed for both children and adults. Conclusion: The proportion of patients prescribed SLIT-tablets increased significantly following their introduction to the market. Despite this increase, SCIT remained the primary modality prescribed to patients with grass pollen allergies over the study period. This may be due to a preference of providers to prescribe SCIT to treat sensitivities to multiple allergens rather than prescribe a single allergen tablet. Background: There are gaps in our knowledge of the patient path from diagnosis to treatment and beyond. This survey aimed to assess AR diagnosis, treatment, concerns and expectations for the future from the patient perspective in Italy. Method: Doxa Pharma interviewed a sample of AR patients (attending a participating specialist centre for the first time) by computer assisted telephone interview. Results: Five hundred and fifty-two AR patients were interviewed (52% male, mean age: 32 years, mean duration of diagnosis: 5 years). The most frequently reported symptoms were sneezing (73%), rhinorrhea (68%) congestion (63%) and nasal itch (56%). GPs first suspected AR in 40% of cases, but 31% of patients said they suspected AR themselves. Specialists made the formal diagnosis in 79% of cases. On average patients used 1.7 AR products. Multiple AR therapies were used by 55% of patients (dual therapy: 36%; triple therapy 13%; >3 therapies: 6%). Antihistamines were combined most frequently with nasal corticosteroids for those on multiple therapies. Twenty-five percent of patients reported trying AR homeopathic remedies. Sixty-four pecent admitted to taking medication as needed. Almost half of patients (43%) conceded that they were not satisfied with their AR medication. Patients reported that AR had a significant negative impact of their daily activities with an average score of 5.71 (10 extremely limiting and 1 not limiting at all). Sixty-one pecent were concerned their health could deteriorate, with 59% worrying about the onset of other disease, most notably asthma (81% of patients). Finally, patients' main expectations for the future were to manage and ease their AR symptoms (45%) and be cured (22%). Conclusion: Almost 50% of patients are not satisfied with their AR treatment, even those on multiple therapies. More effective therapies such as an advanced intranasal delivery system of azelastine hydrochloride and fluticasone propionate can now be recommended (pharmacists) and prescribed (physicians) to better manage moderate to severe AR. Background: Many allergic rhinitis (AR) patients self-medicate and combine over the counter products at the pharmacy. This survey aimed to establish how AR is diagnosed and treated by Italian pharmacists, and to explore the pharmacists' role in facilitating/delaying diagnosis and access to treatment. Method: Doxa Pharma interviewed 100 pharmacists by computer assisted telephone interview, asking questions on (i) AR diagnosis (ii) treatment and (iii) knowledge of the guidelines. Results: Pharmacists were mostly male (54%mean age: 54 years), reportedly seeing 75 AR patients/month on average. Eye watering was considered most indicative of AR followed by sneezing, congestion and rhinorrhea. Seventy-six pecent understood that AR could lead to asthma if not treated in a timely manner. Pharmacists said that 41% of AR patients presented with a prescription, 33% asked for a recommendation and 26% asked for a specific treatment. If asked, pharmacists reported recommending an antihistamine (AH; 56%), vasoconstrictor (21%), homeopathic therapy (12%) or an intranasal/oral corticosteroid (12%). They felt that AH were the most common treatment asked for by AR patients (52%) and prescribed by doctors (55%). Eighty-seven pecent of pharmacists conceded an unawareness of ARIA guidelines. Only 46% of pharmacists reported referring AR patients to a doctor, most commonly to a GP. Knowledge of, and willingness to refer to specialist centres was low. Conclusion: Pharmacists are the gatekeepers in AR management. Currently, referral to doctors is low and recommendation of oral AH is high. Future guidelines and education programs must also recognise pharmacists as their target audience and provide tools to simplify AR assessment (e.g. visual analogue score) and treatment so that pharmacists can recommend the most recent and effective treatment options (e.g. an advanced intranasal delivery system of azelastine hydrochloride and fluticasone propionate) for patients who are known to have moderate to severe AR. Background: The pharmacy is an important port of call for allergic rhinitis (AR) patients who self-medicate and combine over the counter products. This survey aimed to establish how AR is diagnosed and treated by Italian pharmacists. Method: Doxa Pharma interviewed 100 pharmacists by computer assisted telephone interview, asking questions specific to their last AR case on AR severity and treatment. Results: Last reported AR cases were mostly female (81%; mean age: 36 years) presenting with eye watering (45%) and nasal obstruction (41%) predominantly. According to pharmacists, their last patient case had moderate disease (5.2 out of 10 on average [1 = not severe at all; 10 = very severe]). Only 27% of patients presented with a prescription, the majority (55%) asking for a treatment recommendation or for a specific treatment (18%). If asked, 67% said they recommended an antihistamine (AH), 20% a vasoconstrictor, 9% a nasal corticosteroid, 4% a homeopathic product and 2% eye drops. When asked for a recommendation, only 7% of pharmacists reported referral to a doctor. Conclusion: Italian pharmacists, recommended AH to the majority of AR patients, despite patient severity and the limited effect of oral AH on nasal obstruction. Eye drop recommendation was low despite eye watering being reported as the most common presenting symptom. It is important that pharmacists are able to accurately assess AR disease severity, consider the predominant presenting symptom pattern and make guideline-informed treatment recommendations which triggers referral to a doctor in the majority of cases. Allergy societies must develop AR guidelines and education programs for pharmacists and provide tools to simplify AR assessment (e.g. visual analogue scale) and treatment so that they can recommend the most recent and effective treatment options (e.g. an advanced intranasal delivery system of azelastine hydrochloride and fluticasone propionate) for their patients with moderate/severe AR. Allergic rhinitis diagnosis, treatment and impact on patients in Italy: the GP perspective Background: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a chronic disease which is increasing in prevalence and becoming more difficult to treat. This survey aimed to establish how AR is diagnosed and treated by GPs in Italy, and to explore their role in facilitating or delaying diagnosis and access to treatment. Method: Doxa Pharma interviewed 100 GPs by computer assisted telephone interview, asking questions on (i) AR diagnosis (ii) treatment, (iii) knowledge of guidelines and (iv) impact of AR on patients' lives. Results: GPs were mostly female (75%; mean age: 57 years) and reported seeing 46 AR patients/month on average. Sixty-eight pecent reported making the diagnosis personally, relying on rhinorrhea, sneezing and obstruction, primarily. Asthma was considered most commonly correlated to AR when making a diagnosis (56%), and the main pathology to which AR patients were vulnerable (80%). Referral was low; 17% reported referring AR patients to another doctor (i.e. allergist, ENT or pulmonologist), with 15% referring to an Allergy Centre. Sixty-nine pecent of GPs formulated treatment personally, but approx. half of them admitted not being aware of the ARIA guidelines. Branded mometasone furoate was given as the most common treatment prescribed (54%), fol-lowed by desloratadine (40%), ebastine (31%) and generic mometasone (31%). Twenty-one pecent of GPs said they prescribed homeopathic products. GPs thought that AR had a significant negative impact on patients' daily lives. Conclusion: AR is mainly managed by GPs. Patient referral to allergy centres is low. Allergy guidelines and education programs must acknowledge that GPs are managing the vast majority of AR patients and must tailor their programs to GP needs e.g. simplify AR assessment (e.g. using a visual analogue scale) and treatment so that GPs can provide the most recent and effective treatment options (e.g. an advanced intranasal delivery system of azelastine hydrochloride and fluticasone propionate) for patients with moderate/ severe disease. Allergic rhinitis diagnosis and treatment in Italy: GP perspective of their last case Background: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a chronic disease. It is increasing in prevalence and becoming more difficult to treat. This survey aimed to establish how AR is diagnosed and treated by GPs in Italy. Method: Doxa Pharma interviewed a representative sample of GPs by computer assisted telephone interview. GPs were asked questions specific to their last AR case on (i) diagnosis (ii) treatment and (iii) disease management. Results: Hundred GPs were interviewed. Their last AR cases were mostly male (61%; mean age: 36 years). The most common presenting symptoms reported were rhinorrhea (54%), congestion (51%), sneezing (48%) and eye watering (51%). According to GPs, their last patient case was moderately severe scoring 6.03/10 on average (1 = not severe at all; 10 = very severe) and had no concomitant disease (74%). Antihistamine (AH) alone was cited as the most frequently prescribed medication (37%), followed by intranasal corticosteroid (INS) (22%) and AH plus INS (22%). Twenty-seven pecent mentioned they prescribed 2 AR therapies, most notably AH + INS (22%). Most GPs (64%) remembered that their last case was a de novo patient. Of those patients already on treatment, 76% of GPs confirmed that they maintained the same treatment with only 22% changing the treatment. Seventyfive pecent reported that they anticipated a follow-up visit, with 34 days given as an average follow-up time. Conclusion: The average AR patient attending GPs in Italy has moderate-severe disease. GPs most commonly prescribed AH and are reluctant to change treatment even if the patient has moderate to severe remaining symptoms. Guidelines and education programs must simplify AR assessment (e.g. use a visual analogue score) and treatment so that GPs can provide the most recent and effective treatment options (e.g. an advanced intranasal delivery system of azelastine hydrochloride and fluticasone propionate) for their AR patients who have moderate to severe symptoms. Results: In total 366 patients were enrolled, CE-group represents 70% of patients with mean age of 35.6 years and G-group 30% of patients with mean age of 34.6 years. Significant differences were observed in duration of AR-symptoms >4 years and frequency of nasal itching. No difference was observed in other AR symptoms, such as sneezing, rhinorrhea and nasal congestion. Allergy testing (allergen skin test -AST-, and RAST !! ) was performed in 17% of G-group compared to 10% in the CE-group (P = 0.047). AR was significantly impacting patients' life in particular interfered with the sleep (53% vs 34%; P < 0.001) for G-group and CEgroup respectively. Oral Anti H1 !!! Particularly fexofenadine were the most recommended medication in both groups (87.7% and 86.2% CE-group and G-group respectively) followed by INCS !!!! (86% G-group vs 76% CE-group). Conclusion: AR and its symptoms significantly impact patients 0 life. Most of physicians follow their own clinical experiences rather than international guidelines for managing AR furthermore physicians adhere to the guidelines regarding medications more than testing for allergy. [i]Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA); European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology); Joint Task (2011) (2012) in E.N.T. compartiment 60 patients aged between 12-18 years old, with vasomotor rhinitis was treated. They were divided in two groups and, we followed main symptoms and clinical signs of disease: nasal congestion, sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal obstruction, nasal voice and headache. Patients from group one was treated in first week with oral pseudoefedrine followed next 4 week with oral antihistaminic drugs and nasal cleaning with nasal saline spray, and the second group was treated first week with oral pseudoefedrine and then for next 4 weeks with oral antihistaminic and intranasal corticosteroids. Results: In the first group 8 (26.6%) patients after 4 weeks of treatment diminish nasal congestion but remaining was aquous rhinorrhea. Most of the patients in the first group 14 (46.6%) of them complety resolved from sneezing, rhinorrhea lost in 8 (26.6%) cases. In the second group 18 (60%) patients lost all signs and symptoms after 5 weeks of treatment. Most of the patients in the second group 25 (84.2%) of them complety resolved from sneezing; nasal obstruction lost in 22 (75%) cases, rhinorrhea in 20 (65.5%) and nasal congestion in 18 (60%) cases. Conclusion: This study showed that the management of vasomotor rhinitis with combined treatment with first phase of oral decongestionant followed by oral antihistaminic and nasal corticosteroid during 4 weeks was better and must effective on patients that have one of this idiopathic form of rhinitis, vasomotor rhinitis. TPS 13 -Diagnosis of food allergy 623 Food challenges in food allergy-nurses fear them but parents value them-and the use of raw milk improves the predictive value of Skin Prick Testing in milk allergy Background: The gold standard diagnostic tool for food allergy is the oral food challenge (OFC). We elected to audit all paediatric OFCs at Wellington Hospital, New Zealand over 12 months from January 2013 for safety, efficiency, family and nurse's satisfaction and the benefits of using raw milk for the skin prick test (SPT). Method: A retrospective chart review of children undergoing OFC between January and December 2013 and questionnaire survey of parents and nurses involved Results: One Hundred and three OFCs were analysed. Seventy-three pecent NZ European 6.8% Chinese, 6.8% other European 4.1% Indian. Mean age of participants 5.35 years and a median age of 4.9 years. 37.8% female. The most common foods challenged were peanut (18.92%), fresh cow's milk (17.6%) and lightly cooked eggs (13.5%). Other common foods included almond, cashew, kiwifruit, sesame, shrimp, tomato and walnut. Of all OFCs analysed, 40.54% positive/ failed, 47.30% negative/passed, 9.50% inconclusive. 74.3% did not require any treatment after a positive reaction, 20.27% were treated with cetirizine, only one child received i.m. adrenaline for wheeze and dyspnoea; (5.41%treatment need not recorded). For raw milk, an SPT wheal size 100% larger than 1% histamine control predicted a positive OFC reaction. (P < 0.05) Family responses: Out of 103 OFCs, 59.46% of families replied to the survey. Of these 63.6% found the OFC very useful, 18.18% somewhat useful, 11.36% somewhat useless. 65.9% of parents were satisfied with the OFC, 20.45% somewhat satisfied, and 2.27% completely dissatisfied. Qualitative themes from the family survey were: Satisfied because they now know their children's allergies and what to expect; Happy with the services pro-vided; Concerns about no clear or delayed follow up; Unclear instructions by nurses at time of challenge; wish to give bigger dose of food allergen as answer inconclusive. Nurse responses: Seventy-five percent of the nurses who responded were somewhat dissatisfied with the procedure and only 25% nurses felt satisfied. Main concern was lack of defined point at which to stop the challenge. Conclusion: OFCs performed in controlled settings by trained professionals are safe. To our knowledge, there is currently no standardised and systematic method to perform the OFC and store results in in public hospitals within NZ. Guidelines need to be modified for children undergoing OFC. Raw milk SPT appears to better predict a positive OFC compared to milk allergen and other raw food SPTs should be trialled. Background: Yellow pea has recently been introduced into the food supply. Cases of anaphylactic shocks were reported due to yellow pea (Dreyer et al., 2013) . The aim of this study is to compare threshold dose of yellow pea to other allergens of the same family of legumes: peanuts, lupine and soja. Methodology: Eight patient files with confirmed food allergy to yellow pea were studied. These patients benefited from skin prick tests, serum IgEs levels and food challenge tests were performed in order to determine threshold level of yellow pea. We compared the threshold level of yellow pea to the threshold level of lupine, soja and peanuts. Threshold levels were compared in mg of protein equivalent: (53% for soy flour, 36.2% for lupine flour, 25% for whole peanut) (Taylor et al., 2014) . Introduction: The nematode Anisakis simplex causes not only the zoonotic disease anisakiasis but also allergic reactions after seafood ingestion in mainly the coastal areas of Europe and Japan. Twelve Anisakis allergens have been registered to date, but the prevalence of IgE among them is not clear. We investigated the prevalence of IgE specific for 9 Anisakis components and the patterns of sensitivity to them in Anisakis-allergic patients. Anisakis-allergic patients (M:F = 9:8, mean age 32.2 years) were enrolled. We measured specific IgE levels for A. simplex by ImmunoCAP for A. simplex. Using patients' sera, we conducted IgE-immunoblotting with the crude extract of A. simplex and ELISA with 9 Anisakis allergen components: rAni s 1, nAni s 3, rAni s 4, rAni s 5, rAni s 6, rAni s 8, Ani s 9, rAni s 11 and rAni s 12. Results: Five patients developed gastrointestinal symptoms, one of whom was diagnosed with gastric anisakiasis by endoscopy. Three patients experienced anaphylactic shock. In the ImmunoCAP for A. simplex, all patients were positive and five patients' titers were over 100 UA/mL. In the IgE-immunoblotting with the crude extract of A. simplex, several bands were detected in the range from approx. 10 kDa to >100 kDa. In the ELISA, the highest rate of positive responses was for Ani s 11 (16/17, 94.1%), followed by Ani s 12 (15/ 17, 88.2%), Ani s 5 (10/17, 58.8%), Ani s 6 (10/17, 58.8%), Ani s 1 (9/17, 52.9%), Ani s 8 (7/17.41.2%), Ani s 9 (7/ 17.41.2%), Ani s 4 (6/17, 35.3%) and Ani s 3 (3/17, 17.6%). One patient with a history of gastric anisakiasis showed IgE response to Ani s 1 more strongly than the other patients. Conclusions: Newly identified allergens such as Ani s 11 and Ani s 12 might be more strongly relevant to Anisakis allergy than classical allergens such as Ani s 3, tropomyosin, and the sensitisation of Ani s 1, a secretory gland-derived enzyme, might be related to anisakiasis. Predictive performance of specific IgE assay for oral food challenge outcomes in young children with suspected egg allergy -IPAD3 g study Background: Food allergy symptoms change with time especially in young children. The predictive relationship between food-specific IgE titers (sIgE) and oral food challenge (OFC) outcomes also changes during infancy and school age. The probability curves for OFC outcomes in children utilising ImmunoCAP sIgE assay (CAP) have been reported, but have not yet been established with IMMU-LITE â 2000 3gAllergy TM (3gAllergy), a sIgE assay with high sensitivity and an extended measurement range. We prospectively analyzed the relationships between sIgE values and the outcomes of OFCs as determined by CAP and 3gAllergy with two specific purposes: 1) diagnosis of egg allergy in infants who had never eaten eggs because of atopic dermatitis or documented sensitisation to egg (group A), and 2) diagnosis of tolerance to egg in preschool children who had been avoiding eggs due to the confirmed egg allergy (group B). Method: A multicenter prospective observation study was performed and 158 children were enrolled, comprising of groups A (n = 84; age: 1 year) and B (n = 74; age: 3-6 years). OFC was performed with cooked egg powder. sIgE titers to egg white and ovomucoid (OM) were measured with CAP and 3gAllergy. The relationship between sIgE values and OFC outcomes was analyzed using ROC and logistic regression analyses. Fitted predicted probability curves were plotted using logistic regression. The sIgE values with 50% probability were significantly lower in group A than in group B. Compared to CAP, 3gAllergy showed higher cut-off values but the area under the ROC curves by the two assays were very similar, indicating comparable assay performance. Data distribution was wider and probability curves were steeper in 3gAllergy. Conclusion: We have established probability curves of egg-sIgE titers for the diagnosis of egg allergy in young children. 3gAllergy had similar predictive performance to CAP but showed higher values and wider data distribution. Background: Pru p 3, a Lipid transfer protein (LTP), is the major peach allergen. LTPs are plant food and pollen panallergens that can cause mild to severe allergic reactions. In peach allergy and LTP syndrome diagnosis, it is frequent to evaluate serum Pru p 3 specific IgE (sIgE) by Im-munoCAP (ThermoFisher Scientific, Sweden), an immunoassay with a detection limit of 0.1 kU/l and a cut-off traditionally set at 0.35 kU/l. Objective: To analyze the prevalence and clinical relevance of Pru p 3 sIgE < 0.35 kU/l in peach sensitised patients. Retrospective observational study of peach sensitised patients, which were grouped according to the Pru p 3 sIgE levels (ImmunoCAP). Medical records of two groups of patients were reviewed (<0.35 kU/l (n = 44, Group A) and >17.5 kU/l (n = 33, Group B)) collecting data on symptoms and sensitisation to other LTP plant foods was evaluated by ImmunoCAPISAC (ThermoFisher Scientific). Background: House dust mite (HDM) and shrimp allergies are common. Double sensitisation to both allergens frequently occurs in areas with high HDM exposure and high shrimp consumption. Identification of primary sensitisation is important regarding proper allergen selection for immunotherapy and appropriate advice for food elimination. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of component resolved diagnostic (CRD) in the diagnosis of shrimp allergy in patients with house dust mite sensitisation. Method: Sixty-six patients with HDM sensitisation, with and without shrimp allergy were enrolled. Skin prick test (SPT), specific IgE (sIgE) to Der p and shrimp extract and sIgE to allergen components: nDer p1, rDer p10 and rPen a1 were performed. Results: Patients were divided into 3 groups according to clinical presentations; respiratory allergy, shrimp allergy and patient with both allergies. (44% vs 7% vs 49%, respectively). Twenty patients (54%) with shrimp allergy had anaphylaxis. Sensitisation profiles to HDM and shrimp components were different among the groups according to clinical presentations. Sensitisation to nDer p1, rDer p10 and rPen a1 were 72%, 20%, 14% in respiratory allergy group, 50%, 50%, 50% in shrimp allergy group and 36%, 21%, 24% in patients with both respiratory and shrimp allergy. Despite comparable skin prick test wheal sizes to HDM and shrimp extracts, patients with respiratory allergy without shrimp allergy had significantly higher sIgE levels to nDer p1 compared with patients with shrimp allergy (5.68 vs 0.2 kUA/l) and had lower sIgE levels to rPen a1(0.04 vs 8.34 kUA/l). In patients with shrimp allergy, median levels of sIgE to rPen a1 were not different between anaphylactic and non-anaphylactic groups. Conclusion: Our findings suggest the role of CRD in diagnosis of shrimp allergy in patients with HDM sensitisation. High titer of sIgE to rPen a1 indicated shrimp allergy but did not predict the severity of reaction. Allergenic profile in allergy to crustaceans without sensitisation to tropomyosin Ortega, S 1 ; Morales, C 1 ; Bartolom e, B 2 ; Martorell, C 1 ; Pel aez, A 1 1 Hospital Clinico Universitario, S. Alergia, Valencia, Spain; 2 Bial-Ar ıstegui, R&D Department, Bilbao, Spain Background: To study the sensitisation profile in patients allergic to crustaceans without sensitisation to tropomyosin. Method: Twelve patients (5 female, 7 male) aged between 19 and 66, displayed various symptoms after ingesting crustaceans (1 urticaria, 2 oral allergy syndrome, 2 digestive symptoms, 7 anaphylaxis). Diagnosis was confirmed after a positive prick test (Bial-Ar ıstegui) or prick-prick with crustaceans and/or specific IgE (sIgE) to crustaceans (>0.35 kU/l) in the abscense of sIgE to tropomyosin. The presence of respiratory allergy was explored. Prick test with aeroallergens (mites, epithelium, fungi, various pollens) and Anisakis Simplex was carried out. sIgE was determined in patients 0 serum (EAST) to prawn, lobster and shrimp. SDS-PAGE immunoblotting was performed to detect the IgE binding proteins. Immunoblottinginhibition was performed using Penaeus extract in solid phase and D. pteronyssinus extract as inhibitor phase. Results: 10/11 patients resulted positive on skin prick test to mites (D. pteronyssinus and D. farinae), 6 suffered from respiratory allergy (rhinitis/asthma) before displaying allergy to crustaceans. Skin prick test with crustacean extract was positive in 7 patients; in the other 5 only prick-prick was positive. sIgE values for crustaceans ranged between 0.4 and 16.5 kU/l. Two sera showed sIgE < 0.35 kU/l. Immunobloting results using sera from 11 patients and lobster extract as solid phase, showed IgE binding proteins of 19-22 kDa, 25 kDa, 40 kDa and high molecular weight (>66 kDa) ones. Immunoblottinginhibition revealed the existence of IgEs able to cross-react between proteins from Dermatophagoides and lobster in 4 out of 5 serum tested, but only in one of them the cross reaction is related to the proteins which bind high levels of IgE in immunoblotting. Conclusion: In patients allergic to crustaceans with negative skin tests to commercial extracts, prick-prick was useful. In addition to tropomyosin, other proteins have been involved in allergy to crustaceans. Although cross-reactivity between proteins from lobster and Dermatophagoides was detected in some cases, its relevance is not clear as in most of our patients it is related to low IgE binding proteins. Diagnostic accuracy of specific IgE to Ara h 6 in adults is as good as Ara h 2 Background: Recent studies have shown the superior value of specific IgE (sIgE) to Ara h 2 in diagnosing peanut allergy in children and adults compared to the currently used skin prick test (SPT) and sIgE to peanut extract. The diagnostic value of sIgE to Ara h 6, another 2S albumin, has so far only been studied in a case-control design. Our aim was to assess the diagnostic value of sIgE to Ara h 6 in an adult population suspected of peanut allergy in a cross-sectional design and to compare that with Ara h 2. Methods: Subjects with a suspected peanut allergy were included between 2003 and 2013 if a diagnostic double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge with peanut was performed. sIgE to Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 was measured by ImmunoCAP ISAC (Uppsala, Sweden) using serum that was collected during routine clinical practice. The diagnostic value was analyzed by the area under the receiver operating curve (AUC). Results: Of 107 challenged subjects, 65 had a positive challenge (61%). Ara h 6 was recognised (value ≥0.3 ISU/l) in 52 subjects (49%), and Ara h 2 in 49 subjects (46%). sIgE to Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 was very well correlated (Spearman's rho 0.94, P < 0.001). The discriminative ability of sIgE to Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 was comparable: AUC 0.81 vs 0.82. Sensitivity values (cut-off value ≥0.3 ISU/l) were suboptimal (69% for Ara h 2 and 71% for Ara h 6) with good specificity values (90% and 86%). The good positive predictive values (PPV) (92% and 88%) and poor corresponding negative predictive values (NPV) (66% and 65%) indicate that both tests are primarily useful in diagnosing peanut allergy (but not the absence of peanut allergy). Increasing the cut-off value to 1 ISU/l, a 95% PPV could be established for both sIgE to Ara h 2 and Ara h 6. Lowering the cut-off value did not result in a better NPV. Conclusion: In conclusion, the diagnostic value of sIgE to Ara h 6 was as good as sIgE to Ara h 2. Diagnosis of severe peanut allergy with basophil activation test in adults Rentzos, G 1 ; Lundberg, V 2 ; Lundqvist, C 2 ; van Odjik, J 1 ; Pullerits, T 1 ; Telemo, E 2 1 Section of Allergology, University Hospital of Sahlgrenska, Gothenburg, Sweden; 2 Deptartment of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden Background: Diagnosis of severe peanut allergy is a difficult issue and may put the patient at risk. There are several adults with a history of anaphylaxis that carefully avoid any contact with peanuts. The conventional tests as skin prick test (SPT) and IgE-tests are not sufficient diagnostic tools to confirm the risk of anafylaxis for the patient. Here, we set out to investigate if the basophil activation test (BAT), may be instrumental for the diagnostis of severe peanut allergy in adults. The aim of the study was to evaluate the use of the non-invasive BAT in addition to the conventional lab diagnostic tests, including IgE sensitisation, for the diagnosis of severe peanut allergy. Methods: Fifty adults allergic to peanuts (PA) with clinical diagnosis of anaphylaxis, 22 sensitised (PS) and 22 controls (C) between the age 18-60 years old were recruited both retrospectively and prospectively into the study. Thirty-nine patients in the PA-group as well twenty patients in the PS-group were also sensitised to birch pollen. All patients and controls were investigated with SPT. Blood tests were taken for assessment of IgE for peanut and birch sensitisation, total IgE and for the basophil activation test (Basoflow Kit, Exbio). Results: The basophil response to peanut was significantly higher in patients with fistory of anaphylaxis to peanuts compared with patients sensitised to peanuts (P < 0.001). Both PA and PS groups were significantly more reactive than healthy controls which showed no basophil response to peanut. The median total IgE in PA-group was 380 kU/l, in PS-group 200 kU/l and in controls 17.5 kU/l. The median of sIgE for peanut was in in PAgroup 59.5 kU/l, in PS-group 2.45 kU/l and in controls 0.0 kU/l. There was only a weak correlation between the peanut specific IgE (r = 0.35 P = 0.014) and the basophil response to peanut in the PA group and no correlation in the PS group. There was no correlation with SPT response or the total IgE levels and the BAT response in any of the groups. Conclusions: BAT is helpful in determining the severity of peanut allergy and may be used as a complementary diagnostic tool to increase the accuracy in the diagnosis of severe peanut allergy in adults, without the need to investigate further with an open peanut challenge. Background: Sunflower seeds (Helianthus annuus) can trigger anaphylactic reactions, generalised urticaria, angioedema, oral allergy syndrome and other symptoms after ingestion. These reactions have been attributed to 2S albumins (SFA-8) and LTP (Hel a 3) . We aimed to characterise the basophil response to storage proteins and oleosins from sunflower seed in patients allergic to sunflower. Method: The proteins 2S, 11S and oleosins were purified from a raw sunflower seed extract by FPLC/HPLC and identified by specific antibodies and peptide mass fingerprinting. We tested the immunological recognition of these proteins by basophil activation test (BAT). Four concentrations (1, 0.1, 0.01 lg/ml) of each protein and the sunflower roasted extract were used. Ten patients were selected by clinical history and skin prick test positive to commercial extract. Five subjects with skin prick test negative to commercial extract and not food allergy were included as controls. Results: All patients showed a positive basophil response to roasted extract. BAT was positive in 87.5% of cases for 2S albumin, 60% for oleosins, and 57.14% for 11S albumin. Fifty pecent of patients were positive to the 3 proteins, 37.5% only for 2S albumin and 12.5% for storage proteins (both 2S and 11S albumin). In 40% of controls the concentration 1 lg/ml of 2S albumin induced low basophil activation. Conclusion: All the sunflower allergens tested in our group of patients were able to induce basophil activation in a high percentage of cases. Storage proteins and oleosins are responsible for sunflower allergy in 50% of cases. Background: Epitope identification provides information essential for understanding antigen components involved in food allergic reactions. In the present study, an in-silico approach is employed to map IgE binding epitopes of major and minor peanut allergens. Method: B cell epitopes were identified for Arachis hypogaea allergens Ara h 1 to 11 using ten web-servers, five each for continuous and discontinuous epitopes. Three dimensional structure was generated for three allergens -Ara h 8, 9 & 10 by homology modeling. The linear predicted epitopes were analysed for PD values by SDAP database and compared with other regions on the basis of different physiochemical discriminators like polarity, hydrophilicity & surface accessibility in terms of percentage of number of residues. Results: Eight of Ara h 1, three of Ara h 2 and two of Ara h 3, in silico predicted B cell epitopes overlapped with the experimentally identified regions. Further, twenty-six linear and eighteen conformational epitopes were predicted by a combination of methods for Ara h 5 to 11. Majority of the predicted residues were present in the coil regions and the highest percentage of hydrophilic residues were observed for Ara h 6 (70.49%). The absolute solvent accessiblity for all the B cell epitopes was > 70% indicating antibody recognition. Property distance index calculated for the predicted epitopes using SDAP showed that six linear epitopes shared similarity with soybean, hazel nut, tomato, maize, apple, sesame, capsicum, banana etc. allergens. These findings suggest that the identified regions may share cross reactivity with some of the known food allergens or may act as novel antigenic determinants. Conclusion: B-cell epitopes of A. hypogea allergens were identified by in silico methods and predicted epitopes of Ara h 1, 2 & 3 correlated well with the experimentally identified regions. This approach may be used to delineate epitopes for other allergens. Background: Peanut and hazelnut are common elicitors of food allergic reactions. Oral food challenges are the gold standard diagnostic, but time consuming, stressful and risky. This fuels the growing interest in component resolved diagnostic as a predictor of challenge outcome. Objective: To investigate the role of peanut-and hazelnut-component-specific IgE in the diagnostic workup of peanut and hazelnut allergy and to identify cut-off levels that may make oral food challenges superfluous. Methods: One hundred and sixty children with suspected peanut and 109 with suspected hazelnut allergy underwent oral food challenges. Peanut-and hazelnut-specific serum IgE as well as specific IgE against individual peanut (Ara h 1, Ara h 2, Ara h 3, and Ara h 8) and hazelnut components (Cor a 1, Cor a 8, Cor a 9, and Cor a 14) were determined by Immu-noCAP FEIA. Results: 69/160 patients (43%) had a positive peanut and 38/109 (35%) a positive hazelnut challenge. Ara h 2-and Cor a 14specific IgE had the largest AUC. Peanutspecific IgE of 100 kU/l gave an estimated 90% probability for a positive challenge outcome, Ara h 2-specific IgE of 41.8 kU/l a 95% probability. A positive hazelnut challenge was estimated for Cor a 14 at 49 kU/l, Cor a 14-specific IgE of 49.0 kU/l gave a 90% probability for a positive hazelnut challenge. A 95% probability could not be determined for both hazelnut and Cor a 14. Conclusions: The use of Ara h 2-and Cor a 14-specific IgE in the diagnostic procedure of peanut or hazelnut allergy offers a clear improvement, however, several children with a cut-off below the 90% or 95% likelihood still need to undergo oral food challenge. Moreover, the use of the 90% or 95% likelihood will still lead in one out of ten or one out of twenty children, respectively, to a falsely positive diagnosis. Background: Allergy to wheat can manifest in different forms: sensitisation to ingested wheat via the gastrointestinal tract can cause traditional food allergy or in combination with exercise, Wheat-Dependent Exercise-Induced Anaphylaxis (WDEIA). Sensitisation to inhaled wheat flour may lead to occupational rhinitis and/or asthma. Methods: We retrospectively investigated 156 patients (age 0.7-73 years) with a case history of wheat allergy. The population was divided into three groups, I: wheat allergy elicited by ingestion of wheat, II: by inhalation and III: WDEIA. All were examined with detailed case history, specific IgE (s-IgE), (Thermofischer AB, Swe-den), Skin Prick Test (SPT) and wheat challenge (nasal or oral AE exercise). Results:: Group I: Twenty one of 95 patients were challenge positive (15 children, 6 adults). All positive children had atopic dermatitis and 90% also other food allergies. All outgrew their wheat allergy (median age for acquisition of tolerance, 1.9 years). Challenge positive patients showed significantly higher levels of s-IgE to wheat and significantly more were SPT positive and had larger wheal reactions to wheat. Challenge negative adults showed higher levels of s-IgE to pollen. Group II: Eleven out of 13 adults with occupational asthma or rhinitis were challenge positive. None outgrew their allergy despite change in occupation. Seven had positive s-IgE and 10 had positive SPT to wheat. Group III: Ten of 48 (adolescent and adults) were positive when challenged during exercise on a treadmill. Challenge positive patients showed significantly higher levels of s-IgE to x-5 gliadin. The natural course is presently unknown. Conclusion: Wheat allergy can manifest as different disease entities, rendering a detailed case history mandatory in each patient. Patient age, occupation and concomitant allergies (food or inhalant) are important factors for evaluation. Background: The uncertainty of nut and peanut sensitisation as well as allergies has increased. The misinterpretation of skinand IgE-test in addition to case history may result in the characterisation of some patients as allergics. Investigation with food challenges is time and resource con-suming, but may help to set an accurate diagnosis, if the suspected food has been avoided due to positive test results and/or history of milder subjective symptoms. Method: The aim was to retrospectively investigate all open food challenges to peanuts, almonds and other nuts with regard to specific IgE sensitisation profile to these foods and suspected symptoms. All food challenges were performed during 2009-2013 and involved peanuts, hazelnuts, almonds and cashew. The challenges were not performed on research basis and therefore only skin-and IgE-tests for native allergens were taken into account. Results: Two hundred and forty-three challenges were performed on 168 patients. Thirty-one pecent were male. The mean age was 31 years. Hazelnut challenge was the most common (120) followed by peanut (92), almond (22) and cashew-nut (9). The suspected clinical symptoms were classified as follows: oral allergic symptoms (OAS) (n:152, of which 107 with co-existent sensitisation to birch pollen), anxiety/ never eaten (ANX) (n:61), asthma (ASTH) (n:9), gastrointestinal symptoms (GI) (n:9), suspected anaphylaxis (SAN) (n:6) and urticaria (URC) (n:6). Almost all challenges in ANX-group (61/62) were negative. In OAS-group 56/152 performed challenges were negative. Out of all 243 challenges 140 turned out negative (56%). Of the 73 positive challenges, all patients experienced mild symptoms related to OAS while 5 cases presented symptoms also from other organs in addition to oral symptoms without developing full anaphylaxis. The titers of IgE-sensitisation were correlated to challenge outcome. Allergen components were not part of routine allergy investigation regularly while their evidence based clinical usage was not proved to be sufficient until now. Conclusion: Anxiety and mild OAS symptoms seem to be related with un-necessary strict dietary avoidance of peanuts and other nuts which may arise from co-existent birch pollen sensitisation. There were no severe reactions during the challenges despite the patient history. Background: Several reports have shown contradictory results in the diagnosis of quinolone hypersensitivity and the cross reactivity between different quinolones. Our aim is to detect the importance of in vivo diagnostic tests in diagnosis of quinolone allergy and to evaluate the cross reactivity between different quinolones including novel quinolone gemifloxacin. Method: We studied 17 patients who had experienced hypersensitivity reactions due to different quinolones. After detailed clinical history, prick and intradermal skin tests (STs) and single placebo controlled drug provocation tests (DPT) were done with the culprit and the alternative quinolones including ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moksifloxacin, ciprofloxacin and gemifloxacin. The patients who experienced anaphylaxis were not provocated with the culprit drug. Results: Twelve (70%) patients suffered from immediate reactions and 5 (30%) experienced late reactions with quinolones in history. Only one patient had allergic reactions to two different quinolones including ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin. Fifteen out of 17 ST results were negative with the culprit drug, however 7 out of 9 DPTs with the culprit drug were positive. A total of 68 STs with alternative drugs were applied and only 2 tests were positive whereas DPTs were negative in these two. Thirteen out of 65 DPTs were positive with alternative drugs. Among these reactions 7 appeared in only two patients. One of these two patients had reported a fixed drug eruption with both ciprofloxasin and ofloxasin and experienced the same reaction with the other three quinolones during DPT. The other patient had experienced an immediate reaction with gemifloxacin and experienced the same reaction with other four quinolones. Conclusion: These preliminary results suggest that STs are not helpful in the diagnosis of quinolone allergy and in the prediction of cross reactivity. Drug provo-cation tests are the most usefull diagnostic method in quinolone allergy. Laguna Mart ınez, JJ 1 ; Gonzalez-Mendiola, R 1 ; Rojas P erez-Ezquerra, P 1 ; Alcorta Valle, AR 1 ; Sanchez-Morillas, L 2 ; Moral Morales, A 1 ; Herranz, M 1 ; Del Pozo, M 1 ; Melendez, L 3 ; Mayorga, C 3 1 Allergy Unit, Hospital Central de la Cruz Roja, Madrid, Spain; 2 Allergy Unit, Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain; 3 IBIMA, Regional University Hospital of Malaga, UMA, Allergy Unit, Malaga, Spain Background: Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are widely used for the treatment of acid-related gastrointestinal diseases and include omeprazole, lansoprazole, rabeprazole, pantoprazole, and esomeprazole. Most reported reactions to proton pump inhibitors are immediate hypersensitivity reactions. Skin prick and intradermal tests may be useful in immediate reactions and diagnosis of potential cross-reactivity. The basophil activation test (BAT) is a useful tool in the in-vitro diagnosis of immediate hypersensitivity reactions to drugs. Recently it has been proposed that basophil activation test (BAT) could be helpful in the diagnosis of IgE-mediated allergic reactions to PPIs. Aim: To assess the role of BAT in the diagnosis of PPI-related immediate hypersensitivity reactions. Methods: Nine patients diagnosed of immediate hypersensitivity reaction to PPIs based on the results of skin tests and oral challenge tests, were selected. We perform BAT in our patients and in several controls with: Omeprazole 2, 0.2 and 0.02 mg/ml, Pantoprazole 2, 0.2 and 0.02 mg/ml, Lansoprazole 2, 0.2 and 0.02 mg/ml, Rabep-razole 2, 0.2, 0.02 mg/ml and Esomeprazole 2, 0.2, 0.02 mg/ml. BAT was performed by flow cytometry FACSCalibur (Becton Dickinson, Aalst, Belgium) using CD63 expression as the activation marker and anti-IgE antibody as the basophil marker. Results were considered positive when the stimulation index was greater than 2. Results: BAT was negative in all controls. Six patients were diagnosed by skin test and 3 by drug challenge tests. Globally BAT was positive in 4 of 9 patients (44.4%). In patients diagnosed by skin test, BAT was positive in 33.33% (2/6) and of those diagnosed by oral challenge test 66.6% (2/3) was positive Conclusion: Skin tests were useful in diagnosis immediate hypersensitivity reactions due PPIs. The basophil activation test could be a complementary technique to assist the diagnosis, but more studies are needed. Azithromycin is more allergenic than clarithromycin in children with suspected macrolides hypersensitivity Barni, S; Butti, D; Mori, F; Pucci, N; Rossi, ME; Novembre, E Allergy, Children Hospital Anna Meyer, Florence, Italy Background: Macrolides are considered safe antibiotics with reduced allergenic activity; however, studies on this subject are scarce, especially in children. The aim of the study is to assess the frequency of hypersensitivity reaction (HR) to clarithromycin (CL) and azithromycin (AZT) in a group of children referred to an Allergy Unit for suspected HR. Nineteen out 77 children (24.6%) reported an history of AR to AZT, 6 (31.5%) reported an IR and 13 (68.42%) a NIR. Three out 6 subjects with IR reported history of mild anaphylactic reaction. Among these 6 subjects, 4 had positive ST. Four patients had specific sIgE for AZT. After the AWU, 9 out of 58 (15.5%) had positive ST or OPT to CL and 9 out of 19 (47.3%) to AZT (P = 0.004). Conclusion: An adequate AWU identified an HR in 15.5% and 47.3% of patients with suspected HR to CL and AZT, respectively. HR are more often found in patients with reported reactions to AZT than in patients with reported reaction to CL. Bavbek, S 1 ; Aydin, O 1 ; Celebi Sozener, Z 1 ; Y€ uksel, S 2 1 Chest Diseases Divission of Allergy, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey; 2 Biostatistics, Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Ankara, Turkey Background: A 'nocebo' effect is defined as troublesome symptoms after the administration of placebo. The aim of this study was to determine the clinical characteristics of nocebo responses and related factors. Method: Patients with reliable history of drug-induced hypersensitivity reactions subjected to placebo controlled oral drug provocation tests and reacted to placebo, were consecutively included in the study. Controls consisted of the randomly selected subjects who had a history of drug hypersensitivity reaction but did not reacted to placebo. Results: There were 137 subjects (43.10 AE 12.65 years), with nocebo and 91 subjects (42.38 AE 12.18 years) without any reaction to placebo. Factors related with nocebo risks were collage graduation and nonatopy. When nocebo effect evaluated according to education level, subjects who graduated from collage as contrast to subjects who graduated from primary school had 3.16 times more nocebo risk (OR: 3.16, CI 95%: 1.36-7.35, P = 0.008). When the reaction risk to placebo between atopic patients and nonatopic patients were compared, OR was found 2.12, (CI 95%: 1.02-4.40, P = 0.043), as being non-atopic patient increases nocebo risk 2.12 times. In terms of the time of first and last historical reaction to drugs, each 1-unit increase in first (OR: 1.008; CI 95%: 1.00-1.02, P = 0.001) and last reaction time (OR: 1.019; CI 95%: 1.01-1.03, P < 0.001) was associated with increased nocebo risk. was associated with increased nocebo risk. Majority of the nocebo reactions (71.5%, n = 98) were classified as subjective with local pruritus as the most common finding. Minority of nocebo reactions (%11.7, n = 16) were objective as cutaneous reactions including flushing and urticaria. Conclusion: In conclusion, subject with high education, nonatopy, and older drug hypersensitivity reactions history seems to be more likely to experience nocebo effect during oral drug provocation tests. Barasona Villarejo, MJ 1 ; García Nuñ ez, I 2 ; Cano Mollinedo, MDM 1 ; Moreno Aguilar, C 1 1 Allergology, Hospital Reina Sof ıa, C ordoba, Spain; 2 Allergology, Hospital Quir on, M alaga, Spain Background: After verifying that there is an intolerance to NSAIDs a controlled single blind exposure test is indicated, to confirm whether the patient tolerates other Cox-1 and Cox-2 inhibitors, such as paracetamol, meloxicam, piroxicam, etoricoxib and celecoxib. We attempt to show the existence of cases in which an intolerance to NSAIDs is accompanied by a sensitivity to etoricoxib or celecoxib or both. Method: We studied 435 patients considered intolerant to NSAIDs after being diagnosed by clinical history and/or by test positivity after controlled exposure (CCT) with aspirin or another NSAID. All subjects underwent three CCT: meloxicam, paracetamol 2 g, celecoxib (in 137 patients piroxicam was also studied and in 52 patients etoricoxib was studied) with divided doses separated by 1 week. Results: Of the 435, 382 patients (88%) tolerated all drugs studied. The remaining 53 had adverse reaction. There were a total of 57 reactions: 12 reactions with celecoxib, 23 with meloxicam, 9 with piroxicam 4 with etoricoxib and 9 with paracetamol. Concerning reactions with celecoxib or etoricoxib there were a total of 16 in 14 patients, 10 of them women. A 66-year-old woman and another woman aged 57 presented reaction with both, although they tolerated meloxicam and paracetamol 2 g. All reactions occurred within the first 2 h after CCT and all but five in which symptoms were respiratory (cough and also dyspnea in one) were mild cutaneous adverse reactions with good response to treatment. Conclusion: Although administering drugs that are considered very safe, such as selective COX inhibitors, to those intolerant to NSAIDs, one should use caution in controlled challenge tests and always prior to recommending their use check their tolerance in the consultation, under supervision of a specialist. Background: A history of penicillin allergy often results in unnecessary avoidance of penicillins, related antibiotics and the use of less effective, more toxic and more expensive alternatives. A study done in British Columbia, Canada demonstrated that the use of alternative antibiotics over standard beta-lactams carried an additional cost of $15, 672 for the 56 patients in their study ($280 per patient/treatment). Although a penicillin allergy is reported by 10% of the population, less than 10% of patients with a history of penicillin allergy are found to be actually allergic to penicillin on skin testing. Many patients receive their first full clinical assessment on a pre-operative basis by Anesthesiologists. Consequently, Anesthesiologists would make effective front-line evaluators for appropriate referrals to assess a history of drug allergy on an outpatient basis. Our study seeks to evaluate the referral practices of Anesthesiologists at Memorial University of Newfoundland and the University of Manitoba to Allergists & Immunologists for the evaluation of penicillin allergy, the potential barriers to referral and whether our survey will serve as a mini-intervention. Methods: A qualitative semi-structured interview was administered to Anesthesiology Physicians and Residents asking if they have ever made a referral to an allergist for work up of drug allergy in a patient, what the perceived barriers are to this, if they believe a referral would be helpful and if a history of penicillin allergy altered their choice of pre-op antibiotic management. Results: 85.7% of respondents have never referred patients for evaluation of drug allergy, although, an equal number felt a referral would be helpful. However, 42.9% said they have verbally communicated to their patients that they should speak to their Family Doctor for work up of their allergy. 28.6% of participants felt time constraint was a barrier to creating a referral, another 28.6% felt that this was the responsibility of another physician (Surgeon or Family Doctor). An additional 28.6% did not comment on barriers but stated they would just give an alternative medication rather than refer. All participants stated they would choose an alternative antibiotic in the case of a history of penicillin allergy. Conclusion: Although a majority of physicians believe a referral to an allergist for the evaluation of an allergy is beneficial, very few do. The etiology behind this is multifactorial. Complicated allergic anamnesis, in vivo tests and the risk of allergic reactions to iodinated contrast agents Nurpeissov, TT; Nurpeissov, TN; Avdugaliyeva, A 1 ; Yessimova, B 1 ; Nurpeissov, T; Kozhakeeva, G SRI of Cardiology and Internal Diseases, Republican Allergological Center, Almaty, Kazakhstan Background: Drug allergy is the one of the actual problem of medicine and allergology. There is heighted awareness about the symptoms and potential consequences of drug allergies by both doctors and patients. It is likely that drug allergies will be increasing further. The first and oldest method of prevention of allergic (and pseudoallergic) reactions is anamnesis. But if it 0 s not always true? Aim: To estimate the usefulness of allergic anamnesis and skin tests for prevention of drug allergy to iodinated contrast agents. Method: The survey included 64 patients aged between 15 and 65 years. The average age was 52.0 AE 2.6 years; 59.4% of men and 40.6% of women with a diagnosis of 'ischemic coronary artery disease' for whom a coronary angiography intervention was justified. Anamnesis was carried out, after it epicutaneous, prick and intradermal tests for Vizipaque, Omnipaque, Ulravist were performed consequentially. The study was conducted in 2 groups: 40 patients without a complicated allergic anamnesis (group A) and 24 patients with anamnesis of drug allergy to other drugs (not iodinate contrasts)group B. In case of positive result of in vivo tests the patient gets another contrast agent for cardiac intervention, which result was negative. Results: It was determined that after the in vivo diagnostics 5.0% of patients in group A were positive for one of the drugs delivered in skin sample, while in group B they made 4.2%. The difference was not reliable (P > 0.05). No one of the patients had an allergic reaction after the intervention (except for a slight skin itching). Conclusion: In this way, it is established that modern iodinated contrast agents are relatively safe medicines. The relative risk of developing a positive in vivo tests results on iodinated contrast agents does not depend on available allergic reactions to other drugs in the anamnesis. Allergy tests in vivo allow carrying out prevention of drug allergy (pseudoallergy) to iodinated contrast agents in hospital setting during coronary angiography intervention. Background: Non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are widely prescribe in daily practice and their use for self-medication is also frecuent. Therefore, they are considered one of the most frequently reasons for adverse drug reactions. Often, the diagnosis of hypersensitivity to NSAIDs is exclusively made by clinical history due to the absence of diagnostic tests in-vivo and in-vitro. The provocation tests are considered the gold standard for diagnosis. Hence, the aim of this study was to value the clinical history as a diagnostic method in patients with a skin reaction history after taking ibuprofen. Method: A descriptive, observational study is presented in 44 cases related to suspected ibuprofen hypersensitivity. Patients recruited in the study (between October 2012 and May 2013) were older than 18 years of age and had hives and/or angioedema history immediately after taking ibuprofen. The skin prick test was per-formed with ibuprofen. Subsequently, oral provocation with ibuprofen to 600 mg was carried out. In case of a positive result, the study was completed with an oral ASA provocation made up to dose of 1 g. Results: From the 44 patients involved, 43.2% reported hives, 20.4% hives and angioedema, 22.7% only angioedema and 13.6% itching. All resulted in negative skin test with ibuprofen. 88.6% (39 patients) had negative oral challenge with ibuprofen and allergy was ruled out. Four of the remaining 5 patients showed positive oral ASA provocation, being diagnosed intolerance to NSAIDs. The fifth one had negative oral challenge and was diagnosed as arylpropionic acid allergy. Conclusion: The medical history may overestimate ibuprofen hypersensitivity. In skin reactions due to this drug, controlled oral challenge is essential to establish accurate diagnosis. Negative predictive value of skin testing for iodinated contrast media allergy Background: Recent work has demonstrated that skin tests (ST) are a valuable tool for the diagnosis of iodinated contrast media (ICM) allergy. However, the negative predictive value (NPV) of ICM skin testing remains uncertain. An initial study by our group in 159 patients, suggested a NPV of ICM skin testing of 96.6% (95% CI, 89.9-103.2). Here, we present data of the continuation phase of this prospective single center study. Method: During a 5.5 year period (July 2008 -January 2014), patients with a previous reaction to ICM who had positive ST for one or more ICM, were called and asked standardised questions about ICM re-exposure and information was retrieved from their medical records. Results: Forty-eight out of 445 patients tested, had one or more positive ST (10.8%). Response rate amongst these patients was 81.3% (39/48 patients) and 3 patients were included based on medical records only. There were 61.9% females, 7.1% had asthma, 35.7% were atopic, and the median age was 61 years (range 13-90). Interestingly, 8 patients had never been exposed to ICM before their first reaction. Initial reactions to ICM were immediate in 29/42 (69.0%) patients (of which 5/29 had grade I, 6/29 grade II, 17/ 29 grade III and 1/29 grade IV anaphylaxis, according to the Ring and Messmer classification), non-immediate in 12/42 (28.6%) patients and of unknown chronology for one patient. The median time interval between the reaction and ST was 3 months (range 1-360). Five patients (5/ 42, 11 .9%), of which 2 had immediate and 3 non-immediate reactions, were reexposed to a negatively skin-tested ICM and did not react. Of note, for 7/37 (18.9%) not re-exposed patients, the treating physician and/or patient had concerns about the validity of the tests and declined further use of any ICM. Conclusion: In patients with positive ICM ST, re-exposure to a negatively skin-tested ICM was safe. Evaluation of patients with only negative ICM ST is ongoing and will enable a more accurate determination of the NPV of ICM ST. We analyzed all the PCDPTs performed in our department during the last 5 years with the question what drugs we tested and what reactions our patients showed. Methods: All the patients underwent PCDPTs from the 1st of October 2008 to the 1st of October 2013 in our department were analyzed for the type of drugs tested and reaction the patients showed. All the patients reported about one or more adverse side reactions to a drug in the background and underwent standard diagnostic procedures prior PCDPT. Results: The PCDPTs were performed either to confirm (26%) or deny (32%) the diagnosis of drug allergy or to find an alternative drug to use if the allergy to certain drugs was confirmed by prior diagnostics (42%). PCDPTs were performed in 243 patients: 22% were to aspirin, 18% to local anesthetics, 17% to antibiotics, 11% to paracetamol and other NSAIDs, 10% to selective COX-2 inhibitors, 8% to steroids, 4% to other non-NSAID analgesics and 10% to other drugs. In 81% of cases no reaction to both placebo and the drug was seen. Eight pecent of PCDPTs showed objectified reaction to the drug, 4% a non-objectifiable reaction to the drug, 5% a questionable reaction to the drug and in 2% of cases a non-objectifiable reaction to placebo but no reaction to drug was seen. Sixty-six pecent of the reactions to placebo and 40% of the questionable responses to the drug occurred in PCDPT to local anesthetics. Fifty pecent of the objectified responses to the drug occurred in PCDPT to aspirin. Conclusion: Aspirin is the most common drug we tested and the most common drug caused the objectified reaction during PCDPTs. In most cases reaction to placebo and questionable responses to the drug occurred in PCDPT to local anesthetics. In most of cases no reaction to both placebo and the drug tested was seen. Background: Betalactams are the most frequent cause of antibiotic hypersensitivity reaction. Clinical history is believed to be unreliable and diagnosis could only be determined using the standardised diagnostic procedures proposed by the European Network for Drug Allergy (ENDA). However, the diagnostic value of this complex and time-consuming allergologic work-up in real life practice remains problem. This study aim to test accuracy of clinical diagnosis algorithm with standardised diagnostic testing. Method: This retrospective cohort included patients with a history of immediate and non-immediate betalactam hypersensitivity whom completed drug testing in adult allergy service since 2008-2013. We classified patients to five groups according to 0 probability of being true allergy 0 and 0 onset of reaction 0 consisting of group 1 anaphylaxis grade III/IV (mostly within 1 h), group 2 anaphylaxis grade I/II (onset varied from 1 to 24 h), group 3 localised urticaria/angioedema (any onset), group 4 delayed reaction with maculopapular eruption and group 5 other symptoms. SCAR were excluded in this study. Results: Of all 99 patients,14 (14.14%) patients were diagnosed betalactam hypersensitivity. Seventy-five percent (9/12) of patients presented with anaphylaxis grade III/IV and 16.7% (2/13) with anaphylaxis gradeI/II were diagnosed betalactam hypersensitivity, whereas 7.3% (3/42) in patients presented with maculopapular eruption. None of patients who presented with urticaria (24) and other symptoms (8) Background: Low molecular weight heparins (LMWHs) are widely used for the prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism (VTE). Common complications of LMWH therapy are bleeding and skin reactions, however the incidence of the latter is often underestimated. Lately, delayed time hypersensitivity (DTH) proved to be the most frequent cause of skin symptoms, occurring in 7.5 percent during LMWH therapy. Other causes, like heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), immediate type hypersensitivity, calcinosis cutis and generalised haemorrhagic bullosis are rare but sometimes life threatening conditions which must be excluded first. Method and results: During a 12 months period we observed 7 consecutive cases with LMWH allergy in a single dermatological institute. Dermal symptoms varied from erythematous plaques and nodules to skin necrosis. Lymphocyte transformation tests were positive to enoxaparine in one. Prick tests were performed with diluted and undiluted LMWH products which confirmed cross allergy to other LMWHs also in one case. HIT was ruled out in all patients with repeated platelet count measurements. Dermal lesions disappeared and all patients completely healed after stopping the ongoing LMWH therapy. Switch to a peroral selective Xa factor inhibitor was uneventful in one case. Conclusion: Our experiences suggest that patients receiving LMWH therapy must be followed up carefully and signs of dermal side effects must be regularly checked. In case of heparin allergy switch to an other LMWH or unfractionated heparin is not recommended, due to frequent cross allergies. In these cases fondaparinux, novel peroral Xa factor inhibitors or direct thrombin inhibitors might be the treatment of choice. Selective hypersensitivity to cefazolincase series Almeida, JP; Lopes, A; Barbosa, M Department of Immunoallergology, Santa Maria Hospital -CHLN, Lisbon, Portugal Background: There is an increasing body of evidence of hypersensitivity reactions to cephalosporins, parallel to its usage boost. In the particular case of cefazolin, the selective hypersensitivity seems to be the preferential presentation and, for its parenteral use, reactions are often immediate and severe. The authors present a retrospective study of all cases of cefazolin hypersensitivity in the last 2 years. Common drugs used were rocuronium, propophol and cefazolin. Case 2: Thirty-six year-old pregnant woman, otherwise healthy, who was submitted to epidural block with ropivacain and sufentanil; immediately after administration of cefazolin, oxytocin and ephedrine, a clinical picture of facial erythema, lips angioedema and hypotension was reported and hemodynamic support was required. Case 3: Sixty-six year-old woman diagnosed with bilateral gonarthrosis with indication for surgical treatment; after epidural block with bupivacain and antibiotic prophylaxis with cefazolin, she suffered an anaphylactic shock with mechanical ventilation support need for 10 days. Conclusion: The allergological investigation in three cases showed all the tests for culprit drugs were negative except for the intradermal test for cefalozin which was positive (immediate) at different concentrations. Challenge tests performed were negative for the other culprit drugs. Our investigation in these three cases has shown a selective hypersensitivity for cefazolin with good tolerance of other betalactam antibiotics. This of clinical reactivity pattern may be associated with the R1 side chain, which is known to be different in cefazolin when compared to other cephalosporins. Background: Drug allergy is caused either by drug itself or its metabolite. Allergenic potential of drug depends on its properties and transformation of drug to its allergenic metabolite strictly depends on metabolic activity. Drug metabolism is mostly controlled by cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme, which has got many isoforms with specific functions in biotransformation. A lot of methods of CYP activity determination have been worked out and put into practice, but none of them have referred to drug allergy processes. In this study we aimed to develop validated method for simultaneous CYP isoforms activity determination for drug allergy testing. Method: Method is based on determination of substances in bio fluids using LC-MS detection. Most important and distributed isoforms of CYP are: CYP3A4, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, CYP1A2. Endogenous chemical substances as reference substrates were used in order to protect patients from different adverse drug reactions. Cholesterol, cortisol, losartan, rosin spirit and caffeine with their metabolites were chosen as reference substances for these isoforms respectively. Results: Methods of determining these substances and their metabolites were developed, tested and validated on clinical samples. Possibility of simultaneous determination of substances and their metabolites mentioned above in bio fluids, using model mixtures, has been achieved. Conclusion: We expect to develop a precise and safe method for simultaneous CYP isoforms activity determination and obtain data on correlation between drug allergy and cytochrome P450 activity. Esponda-Ju arez, K 1 ; P erez-S anchez, N 1 ; Peralta Filpo, G 1 ; Larco Rojas, X 1 ; Cimarra- Background: Betalactam (BL) are the antibiotics most frequent involved in allergic reactions (AR). In vivo and in vitro test should be performed as part of the diagnostic workup. The aim of the study is to describe the performance of these tests in the diagnosis of betalactam allergy. Methods: We included patients ≥18 yearold with suggestive AR to BL referred to our Department between July 2011 and November 2012. Skin prick test (SPT) and Intradermal test (IDT) were performed with PPL (penicilloyl-polylysine) and MDM (minor determinant mixture) (Diater, Madrid, Spain), AMP (ampicillin, 20 mg/ml), PG (benzyl-penicillin, 1000 UI/ ml), AX (amoxicillin, 20 mg/ml). Results were considered positive according to the EAACI/ENDA recommendations. Serum specific IgE (sIgE) to PG, PV (penicillin V), AMP and AX were measured by means of ImmunoCAP (Thermofisher Scientific Phadia). Results: Hundred and eight subjects were included. Mean age was 51.2 year (range 18-83), 33.3% were male. Following the EAACI/ENDA algorithm 34/108 subjects were classified as allergic on the basis of suggestive clinical history together with positive skin tests and/or sIgE to any of the BL determinants tested. The results of these diagnostic tests are shown in the table. In these 34 patients AX was the drug involved in >80% of the reported AR. Conclusion: ID tests provide a higher rate of positive results than skin prick tests and sIgE with the standard cutoff level of 0.35 kU A /l. When the sIgE cutoff level is established at 0.10 kU A /l the performance is similar to the IDT. Background: Walnuts, which are among the most commonly allergenic tree nuts in Europe and the US, frequently undergo thermal processing prior to consumption. The objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of such heat treatments on the antibody reactivity to walnut proteins. Method: English walnuts (Juglans regia) were roasted at 132 or 180°C for 5, 10, or 20 min, then ground and defatted with hexane to produce defatted walnut flour (DWNF). Protein extractions of the DWNF samples were performed and the total soluble protein concentrations determined by Bradford assay. Immunoblots of both soluble and insoluble protein fractions from raw and roasted walnuts were conducted with polyclonal animal antisera. Sera from 11 walnut-allergic subjects were used to perform both IgE immunoblots of soluble and insoluble proteins and indirect ELISAs of soluble proteins. Results: Only the walnut sample undergoing the highest heat treatment (180°C, 20 min) showed significant changes in the concentration or profile of soluble proteins, with an 84% decrease in protein solubility particularly affecting high molecular weight proteins. In blots with walnut-allergic patient sera or animal antisera, any changes observed in reactivity patterns appeared to be primarily the result of alterations in relative protein solubility after roasting. Most notably, IgE and IgG reactivity was observed with both soluble and insoluble walnut proteins. At equal concentrations, soluble roasted walnut proteins showed minimal differences in IgE reactivity by ELISA (1.62% change from raw proteins). The persistence of IgE reactivity to the insoluble proteins from roasted walnuts indicates that thermally-induced protein aggregation is not sufficient to eliminate allergenic potential. While many studies ignore insoluble protein fractions due to the obstacles associated with their analysis, they should be considered crucial components of allergenic foods and analyzed in further detail. The allergenicity of 2S albumin nut proteins: uptake and gene regulation in bmDCs Background: In order to determine the intrinsic allergenicity of food proteins, the storage 2S albumin Ber e 1, the major allergen from Brazil nut seeds (Bertholletia excelsar), and the related but weak allergenic SFA8 from sunflower seeds (Helianthus annuus) are used as model proteins. Previous studies demonstrated that both proteins mimic their native counterparts in structure, biophysical characteristics and immunoreactivity. Here the mechanisms of endocytosis and gene expression of these two proteins were investigated in vitro in a murine system using immature bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (bmDCs). Method: Native and properly folded P. pastoris-derived recombinant proteins were purified, labelled, and analysed by SDS-PAGE, Western blotting and mass spectrometry. The bmDC uptake (endocytosis) of the proteins was determined by flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. Cytokines and mRNAs were measured by ELISA and RT-qPCR. The global gene expression patterns in bmDCs stimulated with nBer e 1 or rSFA8 were then compared to a control naive bmDCs by transcriptomic analysis using Affymetrix gene chip microarray. Results: The mass spectrometric analysis identified glycosylation patterns on the recombinant Ber e 1 (rBer e 1), absent in its native counterpart (nBer e 1) and SFA8. The endocytosis assay has shown that the uptake of the model proteins were mainly via macropinocytosis. However, the uptake of rBer e 1 was also assisted by mannose specific-CLR-mediated endocytosis. Both rBer e 1 and nBer e 1-stimulated bmDCs maintained the immature bmDC phenotype while the control SFA8 induced the maturation of bmDCs and the polarisation towards a TH1 cell response, independent of Toll-like receptors. The transcriptomic analysis revealed that 446 genes, mainly involved in the inflammatory response and DC maturation, were differentially regulated when stimulated with SFA8. Only 84 genes comprised of mostly novel, non-annotated genes and small RNAs were differentially regulated in DCs when stimulated by nBer e 1 alone. Conclusion: These results suggest that the glycosylation of rBer e 1 affects the rate and route of endocytosis of protein in bmDCs compared to its native counterpart but is not responsible for the differential programming of DCs. Further mapping of the differentially expressed genes by DCs when stimulated with nBer e 1 or rSFA8 will reveal how the DCs are programmed to polarise TH1/TH2 cell response. Results: IgE specific for Ani s 1, Ani s 4, Ani s 5, Ani s 9, and Ani s 10 were found in 8, 3, 2, 5, and 9 sera, respectively. Nine sera did not show IgE reactivity to any of the studied allergens. IgG1 to Ani s 1, Ani s 5, Ani s 9, and Ani s 10 were detected in sera from 5, 16, 14 and 4 subjects, respectively. Sera from four subjects did not show IgG1 reactivity to any of the four allergens. IgG4 to Ani s 1, Ani s 4, Ani s 5, Ani s 9, and Ani s 10 were detected in 10, 0, 2, 6 and 1 sera, respectively. Sera from 15 subjects did not show IgG4 reactivity to any of the five allergens studied. The three groups did not show any statistically significant difference in the prevalence of either IgE or IgG reactivity to any of the studied allergens, although we cannot exclude that this was due to the low number of patients analysed so far. Background: Matrix metaloproteinases (MMPs) and their tissue-specific inhibitors (TIMPs) plays an important but underestitate role in allergic diseases. The aim of this study was comparison of the concentration of MMP-2 and MMP-9 and TIMP-1 in patients with food and airborne allergy as compared to patients without allergy. Method: The study was performed in 60 patients with exacerbation of allergic disease (30 with food and 30 with airborne allergies) and 20 healthy subjects. We examined the serum concentrations of MMP-2, MMP-9 and TIMP-1 by ELISA test. Results: The concentrations of sMMP-2 in the groups of patients with airborne and food allergy and control groups were 136.3 AE 41.2, 153.8 AE 97.1 and 119.5 AE 12.5 ng/ml; and sMMP-9 were respectively 184.9 AE 38.8, 198.8 AE 51.4 and 121.6 AE 25.5 ng/ml. sMMP-2 demonstrated statistically significant differences between the group with food allergies and the control group (P = 0.0309), no significant differences between the group of airborne allergy and the control group, as well as between groups of airborne and food allergies (for P = 0.4225 and P = 0.1473). Differences of sMMP-9 levels were significantly higher in the group of airborne and food allergies than in the control group (both P = 0.0000). There was no significant difference between the group of patients with airborne and food allergy (P = 0.3952). The concentrations of sTIMP-1 in groups of patients with food and airborne allergy were significantly higher than those in the control group (respectively P = 0.0000 and P = 0.0003) and were in the group with food allergies 164.3 AE 59.2; airborne allergy 145.4 AE 50.1, whereas in the control group 92.4 AE 26.7 ng/ml. There was no statistically significant difference sTIMP-1 concentrations between the group of patients with airborne and food allergy (P = 0.2458). Conclusion: MMP-2 and MMP-9 and TIMP-1 were significantly higher in patients with food allergy than in the control group. A similar observation (except sMMP-2) also applies to a group of patients with airborne allergy. The results of this study suggest an important role of MMPs and TIMPs in the allergic inflammation. Background: Allergies today are among the most common chronic diseases and are often referred epidemic 21st century, which is an important issue for both medical and social. The aim of this study was to evaluate the concentrations of myeloperoxidase (MPO), neutrophil elastase (EN) and Eselectin in patients with allergic-type food hypersensitivity and in patients with dyspeptic symptoms without concomitant allergic diseases. The study included 80 patients, including 50 with food allergy and 30 patients with dyspeptic symptoms without food allergy. Each respondent blood samples to determine the concentration of MPO, EN and E-selectin. Serum levels of neutrophil elastase, and E-selectin in the serum was performed using kits from Bender Medystem (Medysystem Diagnostic) -Immunodiagnostik Assay. In the test method was used 'Sandwich' ELISA (Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay). The test was performed according to the manufacturer. Quantitative measurement of the concentration of myeloperoxidase (MPO) was performed by enzyme immunoassay (ELISA). Results: In the group of patients with food allergy, the average concentration of myeloperoxidase was 289.37 AE 241.1 ng/mL, the mean concentration of neutrophil elastase was 406.95 AE 317.66 ng/ml, and E-selectin 54.0 AE 21.6 ng/ml. In the group of the patients with dyspeptic symptoms without food allergy, the average concentration of myeloperoxidase was 114.49 AE 219.83 ng/ ml, neutrophil elastase 545.1 AE 262.9 ng/ml and E-selectin 57.7 AE 17.9 ng/ml did not show statistically significant difference between the concentrations of sE-selectin in patients with food allergy in patients with dyspeptic symptoms without food allergy (U test Mann-Whitney test, P = 0.453028). Conclusion: Neutrophils are one of the groups of cells involved in allergic inflammation. In the present work did not show a statistically significant difference between the concentrations of MPO in patients with food allergy in patients with dyspeptic symptoms without food allergy (Test Mann-Whitney U, P = 0.702005), there was no statistically significant difference between the concentrations of sE-selectin in both groups (U test Mann-Whitney test, P = 0.453028). However, in analyzing the concentrations of EN in both groups of patients had statistically significant differences in the mean concentrations of neutrophil elastase in serum (P = 0.000514). In WA specific IgE play a central role triggering the release of chemical mediators from basophils and mast cells. However, CD is an autoimmune disorder. Method: We studied two patients with CD that developed immediate allergic symptoms after eating wheat flour. Case 1: A boy diagnosed at 2-year-old with persistent asthma and egg and fish allergy developed recurrent diarrhoea and weight loss few months after following an egg and fish free diet. Then, he was diagnosed with CD by positive biopsy and anti-transglutaminase IgA. When he was 4-year-old, he developed several episodes of vomiting and hypotension immediately after ingesting foods with hidden wheat flour. Finally, at the age of 8, he developed rhinitis and asthma exacerbation during spring months. Case 2: A girl diagnosed with CD at 14 months, when she was 7-year-old, she developed nasal pruritus, facial angioedema, dyspnoea and cough immediately after eating a soft candy containing wheat flour. Finally, at the age of seven she began with rhinoconjunctivitis in spring season. We performed skin prick tests (SPT) to the foods involved in the reactions and pollen, mites, animal dander and alternaria. Specific IgE was determined by ImmunoCAP, and microarray ISAC was performed. Results: SPT and specific IgE were positive in both cases to grass and olive pollen, wheat flour, gluten, gliadin and Tri a14. Microarray ISAC confirmed specific IgE to rTri a14 -lipid transfer protein (LTP) from wheat in both cases (4.3 and 17.3 ISU, respectively) and measurements to rTri a1 9.0101, n Tria aA_T1 were undetectable, as were to rPru p3, rAra h9, rCor a8, nJug r3, nArt v3, nOle e7and rPla a3 (LTPs). Moreover, case1 had SPT and specific IgE positive to egg white and fish (sardines, cod, hake, tuna). Conclusion: Pediatric patients with CD may develop allergy to Tri a14 and symptoms by ingestion of wheat-derived foodstuffs. Background: IL17 is a cytokine produced by several cells. It plays a role in the mechanisms of allergic reactions involving neutrophils through the induction of production cytokines and chemokines. Activated neutrophils secrete elastase and ROS (reactive oxygen derivatives) important mediators of the inflammatory process responsible for tissue damage. We analyses: Interleukin 17A and neutrophil elastase concentration in serum and ROS production by neutrophils. The correlation between serum levels of IL17A and ROS, and of IL17A and serum elastase were measured. Method: The study included 30 patients with food allergy diagnosed based on history, clinical signs, the presence of positive SPT and serum specific IgE against food allergens selected immunoenzymatic method using sets of Hycor. The control group consisted of 10 healthy volunteers. Concentration was determined by ELISA using IL17A sets eBioscience and elastase with sets BENDERMED SYSTEMS. Examine chemiluminescence by kinetic method luminolo-dependant during 40 min was measured with a luminometer LU-MINOSCAN -Labsystem. Results: Serum concentrations of IL17A and chemiluminescence values obtained by neutrophils and elastase levels were higher in patients with allergic hypersensitivity to food than in the group of healthy subjects. Conclusion: The results obtained confirm the role and increased neutrophiles activity in allergy inflamatory process with examined patients. We also revealed the correlation between those parametres. 665 Allergen to allergy: identifying epithelial endocytotic pathways of peanut allergens Price, D 1,2 ; Ackland, L 1 ; Suphioglu, C 2 1 Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Deakin University, Burwood, Australia; 2 NeuroAllergy Research Laboratory (NARL), Deakin University, Geelong, Australia Background: Food allergy has continued to rise over the past few decades. The increasing occurrence of sensitivity to certain foods remains to be identified, and the allergen-epithelial interaction in particular remains elusive. Peanuts in particular are still one of the highest contributors of anaphylaxis after ingestion of a food allergen. Previous findings by our research group observed that peanut allergens were able to cross the Caco-2 cell culture model of the intestinal epithelium. Specifically, the major peanut allergens Ara h 1, Ara h 2 and Ara h 3, as well as Ara h 6. The direction of this research has deepened into identifying the mechanism by which the Caco-2 monolayers uptake peanut allergens, specifically by endocytosis. Here, we aim to further our understanding about the pathway from allergen to allergy. Method: To achieve this, we treated the human Caco-2 cell culture model with peanut extract and then utilised a combination of inhibition studies and confocal microscopy to identify the endocytotic mechanisms of peanut allergens. Results: Initial findings from the analysis of inhibition studies and confocal microscopy of peanut treated Caco-2 monolayers suggests that transcytosis occurs via endocytotic mechanisms. Conclusion: By increasing our understanding of peanut allergen epithelial transcytosis, we are closer to understanding the molecular mechanisms of the peanut allergen atopic pathway. Background: Food allergy animal models that mimic the human disease are useful for determining immunological mechanisms, predicting triggers and to investigate the safety and efficacy of new therapeutics. Allergies represent a socioeconomic problem that has affected increasing world population. Although allergy to fruits be relatively uncommon compared to other food allergies, they are not rare. We propose the development of a food allergy model for C. papaya in mice which allows investigate the contribution of abundant allergens in response. Method: Female Balb/c mice were maintained fasting for 7 h and then sensitised with fresh extract C. papaya through intragastric route, once a week per eight consecutive weeks. The body weight and blood sample are collected in 0, 21, 42 and 56 days. In last day 56 animals were challenge by oral route with a rectal thermometer the body temperature was registered and respiratory parameters was measured by Pletismography (Buxco) by up to 45 min. Histological methods were realised for measure infiltrate in stomach and small intestine. Results: C. papaya group mice were underweight when compared to the saline group. The oral challenge (day 56) promoted a drop of the body temperature (until 1.5 degrees) and alterations on the respiratory parameters as respiratory frequency, decreased the expiration and relaxation times in a framework of respiratory distress with bronchoconstriction. Specific IgG1 and IgE were detected in the serum of sensitised mice (ELISA) as well as an anaphylactic activity (title 1/40) by Active Cutaneous Anaphylaxis. In addition, after 24 h to oral challenge, sensitised mice presented an intense mast cell density in stomach and eosinophil in intestine. Conclusion: We established a new adjuvant free mouse model, which demonstrated that C. papaya is an allergenic food that induces specific antibodies able to degranulation mast cells and/or macrophage. We suggested that this adjuvant-free model could be a useful tool to study allergen components involved in food allergy trigged by tropical fruit since it mimics the natural human exposure to food. Background: This study is part of a multiphase project aiming to validate a mouse model to assess the potential allergenicity of hydrolysed infant formulas. Previous results showed its transferability and its ability to discriminate between the sensitising properties of whey protein and extensively hydrolysed whey protein. In the current study, the sensitising properties of 3 partially hydrolysed whey proteins (pWH-A, -B and -C) were investigated in the mouse as well as the classically used guinea pig model. Methods: Mice and guinea pigs were orally sensitised with whey by gavage or ad libitum via the drinking water respectively. Whey-IgE, mMCP-1, anaphylactic shock symptoms, body temperature and acute allergic skin responses were determined upon challenge in mice in four centers. In guinea pigs anaphylactic shock symptoms (ASA) were measured upon intravenous challenge at one center. Results: Elevated levels of whey-specific IgE were detected in sensitised mice in all centers although the group average did not reach significance for IgE in center 2. Therefore, all results of this center are excluded. The remaining three centers showed acute allergic skin responses and enhanced mMCP-1 levels in the positive control upon challenge. In two out of three centers, additional shock symptoms and a drop in body temperature were observed. All centers showed a clearly decreased sensitising capacity in the overall comparison of the pWH's as compared to whey with the highest decrease in sensitising capacity for pWH-A. However, none of the centers was able to differentiate between the sensitising capacities of the pWH's based on a single parameter, stressing the necessity of multiple clinical read-out parameters. In the overall comparison over the three institutes, no difference was observed on the acute allergic skin response and mMCP-1 in pWH-A mice compared to non-sensitised mice The ASA in guinea pigs was negative for all six animals sensitised with pWH-A, whereas pWH-B and pWH-C showed moderate ASA responses. Conclusions: Based on the overall data of three centers, these results suggest that the murine model is an appropriate model to determine the decreased sensitising capacity of pWH's based on the measurement of multiple parameters. The mouse model might therefore be favorable above the guinea pig model for testing the allergenicity of hydrolysed infant formulas. A future challenge is to develop an overall scoring system for proper risk assessment, taking all parameters into account. Background: LTP are pan-allergens present in many plants. Sensitisation to LTP was mainly described in the Mediterranean region but also exists in Nothern Europe. The clinical presentation varies from asymptomatic sensitisation to anaphylaxis. Cannabis Sativa, popular drug in Europe, also contains an LTP (Can s 3) and could play a role on the primo-sensitisation to ns-LTP. Methods: A Belgian male of 20 years old consulted in 2012 for an acute episode of urticaria with anaphylaxis after an early morning run. One hour before he ate yoghurt, fresh grapes, banana and kiwi, usually well tolerated. He mentions an oral allergy syndrome with different fruits such as apples and contact urticaria, rhino-conjunctivitis with asthma related to the use of marihuana (both by direct contact and smoking). Results: Pollen Skin Prick Tests (Stallergens) were positive to pollens of Birch (Betula a.), to Mugwort (Artemisia v.) and to the mixture of Grass Pollens. Native Skin Prick-Tests were positive to Grape, Kiwi and Banana and also to Cannabis Sativa Sativa and Cannabis Sativa Indica (4 and 10 mm for leaves, 10 and 20 mm for flowers). ImmunoCAP Hemp (Cannabis S Sativa) was positive at 13.10 kU/l (Laboratory of Professor D. Ebo, Antwerpen). Immu-noCAP ISAC (Thermofisher) confirmed sensitisation to rBet v 1 (2, and different other PR 10 proteins and to ns-LTP proteins (rCor a 8 3, 8 ISU-E and rPru p 3 2, 7 ISU-E). For Kiwi it also showed sensitisation to its Thaumatin-like Protein nAct d 2 (5,7 ISU-E) but not for its protein PR10 (rAct d 8 < 0.3). Conclusion: This patient has a known and confirmed allergy to Cannabis. He presented food anaphylaxis symptoms by sensitisation to LTP; with probably an additional role of the exercise. We therefore suggest that LTP sensitisation was initiated by repeated contact with Cannabis plants a few years ago. We don't really understand and cannot exclude the potential extra role of the Thaumatin-Like Protein in this case. Currently, sustainable food production, including alternative protein sources, is receiving a lot of attention and exploration of these sources is widely supported by international organizations. Existing guidelines to assess the allergic potential of these sources are restricted to a qualitative assessment of allergenicity and often results in an oversimplification of their hazard assessment. One of the major challenges is to accurately and quantitatively assess the allergenicity of new or modified proteins. Therefore, we propose a quantitative statistical prediction model which predicts the relative allergenicity of a new protein compared to known allergenic foods and proteins. As a first step, a scale for the relative allergenicity has been developed using data from a set of high/low allergenic foods and proteins. The scale was based on 1 the prevalence expressed as the percentage of the general population diagnosed with the allergy and 2 the potency of the protein expressed as the ED50 in mg-protein of the allergen. Severity of symptoms was not included, since this is a result of the exposure and the sensitivity of the individual rather than an inherent and independent attribute of the protein. As a second step, the first version of the statistical predictive model has been developed. To this end, physico-chemical characteristics and biological experimental data were analyzed from a set of high/low allergens. These data were combined with the information on possible relationships between these characteristics and allergenicity retrieved from literature into one statistical model to identify relationships between the characteristics of known allergens and their relative allergenicity. This model enables the projection of new proteins on the scale and assess their allergenic hazard relative to the known allergens allowing a quantitative assessment of the relative allergenicity of a new protein. There is a growing need for the development of approaches suitable for the characterisation of the allergenic potential of novel and modified food proteins. The current methodology is effective at identifying proteins that are likely to cross-react with known allergens. However to date there are no validated in vitro and in vivo models for allergenicity testing of novel proteins. In addition, most assays investigated show false positive results for non-allergens. For this purpose, an in vitro DC-T cell assay and an in vivo mouse model were used to test distinctions between food proteins known to cause food allergy (Ara h 1, ß-Lactoglobulin) and food proteins rarely associated with food allergy (soy lipoxygenase, gelatin). DC-T assay: A CD4+ T cell pool containing protein specific T cells was obtained from protein/alum-immunised C3H/HeOuJ mice. The CD4+ T cells were incubated for 72 h with protein-pulsed bone marrow derived dendritic cells (DC) from na€ ıve C3H/HeOuJ mice. Hereafter, IL-5, IL-10, IL-13 and IFN-c production was analyzed. Mouse model: C3H/HeOuJ mice were sensitised by intra-gastric administration of protein with cholera toxin on days 0 and 7. On day 16, mice were challenged intragastrically with protein and blood samples were taken. Serum was analyzed for protein-specific immunoglobulins and mouse mast cell protease-1 (mMCP-1). Ara h1-and ß-lactoglobulin-pulsed but not soy lipoxygenase and gelatin-pulsed DC induced the production of IL-5, IL-10 and IL-13 from T cells. This Th2 type profile selectively induced by ß-lactoglobulin and Ara h 1 in vitro was further confirmed in vivo, shown by induction of mMCP-1 release and protein-specific IgG1 and IgE by ß-lactoglobulin and Ara h 1, but not by soy lipoxygenase and gelatin. In conclusion, both the DC-T cell assay and the mouse model were able to distinguish known allergens from low/non-allergens. This approach may prove to be a promising method to identify new allergenic proteins in the diet which will be the focus of future research. Background: Anaphylaxis is an acute, potentially life-threatening multisystem syndrome. The aim of this study was to evaluate features of the transcriptional activity genes TGFB1 (transforming growth factor, beta 1), PLA2G7 (plateletactivating factor acetylhydrolase) and ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) in patients with anaphylaxis. Methods: 34 patients (median age 7 years; range 3-18 years) with a diagnosis of anaphylaxis in remission, 35 children with atopic dermatitis and 41 children of control group without allergic diseases and IgE sensitisation (negative results ImmunoCAP 100 Phadia AB) were enrolled in the study.Total RNA was prepared from blood samples using Trizol RNA Prep 100 kit (IsoGen, Russia). RT-PCR was performed with the MMLV RT kit (Evrogen, Russia), according to the manufacturer's instruction. Real-time quantitative PCR was performed with the qPCRmix-HS kit (Evrogen, Russia). Primers and probes were synthesized by DNA Synthesis, LLC (Russia). Amplification, detection, and data analysis were performed with a CFX-96 real-time detection system (Bio-Rad, USA). Nonparametric tests (U-, F-tests) were used for statistical analysis. Results: A significant decrease of gene expression PLA2G7 was observed in patients with anaphylaxis (P < 0.05) in compare with control group. A total loss of PLA2G7 gene expression was observed in 11.8% of children with anaphylaxis. TGFB1 gene expression was significantly lower in patients with anaphylaxis as compared with the expression of this gene in children with atopic dermatitis (P < 0.05). ACE gene expression was detected in 71.40% of children in the control group. Patients with anaphylaxis observed a significantly lower frequency of detection of ACE gene expression 38.2% (P < 0.05) compared with the control group. Conclusion: Patients with anaphylaxis are characterised by reduced transcriptional activity of PLA2G7 and ACE genes compared with children without atopy, and decreased expression of TGFB1 gene compared with atopic dermatitis patients. Background: International research shows that Food Allergy has an impact on the quality of life (QoL) for the affected child, adolescent and even in adulthoodas well for the parents. Methods: The cohort comprises an existing database with 394 Danish children, teenagers and adults diagnosed with peanut/egg/ hazelnut allergy in accordance with EAAC-I guidelines. We used the validated Food Allergy Quality of Life Questionnaires (FAQLQ) and Food Allergy Independent Measure (FAIM). The questionnaires have been translated from English to Danish in accordance to World Health Organisation 0 s criteria and are web-based. The questionnaire form varies according to patient's age group: Parent Form 0-12 years (N = 223), Child Form 8-12 years (N = 73), Teenager Form 13-17 years (N = 49), Adult Form 18 years and up (N = 29). The siblings receive an age-adjusted questionnaire. The patients and their relatives were invited by letter with a link to the homepage www.datafabrikken.dk and a code for each family member to access their specific questionnaires'. Results: We found a significant difference between QoL scores (FAQLQ-PF) for parents to children aged 0-7 years and scores for older children (M = 2.0), teens and adults (FAQLQ-CF/TF/AF) (M = 2.8), P < 0.001. The greatest burden is reported by adolescents (M = 3.2), P < 0.001. The impact on female QoL is greater than that of males and increases according to age, P < 0.001, peaking at adolescence. Furthermore, controlling for number of allergens and severity of symptoms, those who reported a wheat allergy had a significantly higher burden on QoL, than peanut/nut or egg, P < 0.01. Finally, a strong relationship was found between expectation of outcome (FAIM) following an allergic reaction and QoL (r = 702; P < 0.001). Conclusion: These findings highlight the unique help, guidance, and support needs of children with food allergy who are entering adolescence. Emphasis is on how food allergy affects every-day lived experience and development. This may also increase awareness in their respective social networks; kindergarten, school and in the working environment. These and future results of this study will also provide knowledge to health professionals, improving communication and guidance for patients and parents in clinical settings. Study results will form the basis of a norms database and manual for FAQLQ questionnaires. Background: It has been reported that the prevalence rates of fish allergy have increased last years. The fish allergy clinical symptoms can be severe and this type of food allergy is likely to be a lifelong disorder for most children. The prevalence of fish allergy in Russia is unknown. The fishing and use of uncooked river fish is a general practice of Siberian population, especially in rural settlements. Purpose: To estimate the prevalence of fish allergy in children of Tomsk Oblast (West Siberia, Russia). Method: The cross-sectional study in random samples of primary schoolchildren aged 7-10 years (n = 13 010) from the Tomsk Oblast, Russia, was performed as a part of the EuroPrevall project (FP6-FOOD-CT-2005-514000). The case-control sample was recruited for the second stage (n = 1288). Thus who reported adverse reactions to food in the screening stage were considered as cases, children without reported reactions were controls. The standardised screening questionnaires were used at the screening stage. The casecontrol stage included the completion of a clinical questionnaire, skin-prick test (ALK-Abell o, Spain), and serum specific IgE measurement (ImmunoCAP, Phadia, Sweden). Probable food allergy was defined as the combination of reaction within 2 h after food ingestion together with specific IgE ≥ 0.35 kU/l and/or positive skin-prick test to the same food (mean diameter of wheal ≥3 mm). Results: The prevalence of parent-reported symptoms to fish in children of Tomsk Oblast is 1.65% (1.66% in urban area and 1.65% in rural settlements, OR 1.01; CI 95% 0.76-1.35; P = 0.95). The prevalence of probable food allergy to fish is 0.32% (0.32% in urban area and 0.33% in rural settlements, OR 1.08; CI 95% 0.55-2.14; P = 0.80). Conclusion: The prevalence of food allergy to fish in children aged 7-10 years in West Siberia is 0.32% without significant differences between rural and urban population. Background: Food allergy is a growing public health issue, particularly in infants and children. Recently the World Allergy Organisation has lamented the paucity of accurate, current regional food allergy prevalence data. The incidence of food allergy in Irish children is not yet known. Studies in other populations may not be readily applicable to Irish children due to higher prevalence of Atopic Disease and differing early feeding practices. Methods: The BASELINE Birth Cohort study is the first birth cohort study in Ireland. Two thousand and thirty-seven infants were recruited from July 2008 to October 2011. Appointments were conducted shortly after birth and at 2, 6, 12 and 24 months. Screening questions for food allergic symptoms were asked at each visit. Potential adverse reactions to food were investigated using modified EuroPrevall diagnostic criteria. At 24 months all children had screening Skin Prick Test to Cow's Milk, Egg, Peanut, Cod, Wheat and Soya. Oral Food Challenge (OFC) was subsequently conducted unless the food was already safely tolerated in the diet. Children with previous positive OFC's were not re-challenged at 24 months if there was a clear history of a recent food reaction and IgE sensitisation was still evident. Results: Thousand seven hundred fortyfive infants participated to 12 months, with an adverse food reaction reported for 11.7% (204/1745). Fifty children had OFC confirmed food allergy while a further six infants were sensitised to a food with a positive clinical history of reaction but parents deferred OFC. Cumulative incidence of Food Allergy at 12 months was taken at 3.21% (56/1745).At 24 months, 1402 children had SPT screening conducted. Eighty-nine children had positive SPT to any food giving a food sensitisation rate of 6.34% (89/1402). To date, 30 children were sensitised only, 1 infant was lost to follow up and 1 infant awaits primary OFC. Fifty seven children demonstrated SpIgE mediated Food Allergy 57/1402 (4.06%). Conclusion: In Ireland IgE mediated food allergy is present in 3.21% of 1 year old and 4.06% of 2 year old children. This robust body of work fills the gap in Irish food allergy prevalence data and will aid towards the provision of adequate specialist health care services for food allergic children. FA-free diets were reported in the last year of the surveyed schools with upward trend year on year (P < 0.016) (total studied period 4.31%). The most common allergenic foods declared by allergists were egg (32.78%), fruits (21.04%), nuts (17.87%), milk (17.08%), fish (13.92%) and legumes (10.54%) (upward trend for nuts, P < 0.003). Milk and egg were the most common foods in patients <6 years of age, whereas fruits, nuts and legumes were the most prevalent foods in patients over 6 years. Significant differences were shown in FA-free diet prevalence in private schools (P < 0.001). Conclusion: Prevalence of FA-free diets in the Hortaleza District schools is high, similar to the Spanish Alergol ogica 2005 report. In private schools the prevalence of FA-free diets was higher than in state and grant aided schools. School canteens represent a good source of information on FA trends in children. Prevalence and symptom expression of food hypersensitivity among schoolchildren Introduction: Symptoms of food hypersensitivity (FHS) varies widely in severity and organs affected. Food-avoidance, especially elimination of essential foods, impacts health related quality of life and nutritional status. The aim with the current study was to examine the prevalence of food hypersensitivity, perceived symptoms and factors associated with food hypersensitivity in a large cohort of schoolchildren. Methods: Parents to 2585 (96% of invited) children in ages 7-8 years in Northern Sweden completed a questionnaire about allergic diseases and food hypersensitivity, an expanded ISAAC questionnaire. A subset of 1700 (90% of invited) children also participated in skin prick testing to ten airborne allergens. Results: The prevalence of FHS to milk, egg, fish, wheat, soy, fruits and/or nuts (any FHS) was 21% and significantly more common among girls. Most common was FHS to milk, 9%. Oral symptoms, reported by 47.4%, were the most common symptom. The major triggers for oral symptoms were fruits, reported by 87.4%. Gastrointestinal symptoms were reported by 45.7%. Of those with gastrointestinal symptoms, 87.7% reported milk as the trigger. Factors significantly associated with any FHS were female sex, allergic heredity and positive skin prick test. Eczema was significantly associated with FHS to milk while FHS to other foods were associated with asthma, rhinitis and eczema as well. Conclusion: Perceived symptoms of food hypersensitivity were common in schoolchildren. The most common symptom was oral symptoms with fruits being the major trigger while gastrointestinal symptoms mainly were associated with cow 0 s milk. A detailed medical history of type of clinical symptoms is important in diagnosing food hypersensitivity because different foods provide different symptoms. The contradictory association of atopic dermatitis with egg and milk allergy in children with food allergy Background: Food allergy (FA) is found one in three children with AD. Usually FA and AD appear at the same time of life as a part of atopic march. Data about the clinical features of food allergic children that create the tendency for AD is limited. We aimed to describe the factors for the tendency of AD in children with food allergy and the association between phenotypes of FA and AD in children. Method: The diagnosis of IgE-mediated FA was based on the history related to culprit food with positive food sIgE and/or skin prick tests. Children diagnosed with FA (n = 466) were classified according to the existence of concurrent AD. Groups were compared according to food allergens, aeroallergens, eosinophil, total IgE and initial food sIgE. Kruskal-Wallis and chi-square tests were used for statistical analysis. Results: Two hundred and ninety-seven children with FA and AD [0.9 years (0. 5-1.5) ] and 169 children with FA and without AD [2.1 years (1-6)] were included. Egg allergy and multiple FA were more frequent in children with AD (83%, 60%) than children without AD (41%, 47%), (P < 0.0001, P = 0.009). However cows 0 milk allergy (CMA) and Der farinae-Der pteronyssinus sensitisation were less frequent in children with AD (%11; %3.7) than children without AD (26%, 8.9%) (P < 0.0001, P = 0.02). Eosinophil was higher in children with AD [6% (3. 5-9.4 )] than children without AD [3.8% (2.3-6. 3) (P < 0.0001)], whereas total IgE was lower [86 (32-230) vs 119 (54-292), P = 0.0017]. Initial cows' milk sIgE levels in children with AD were lower 1.7 (0.3-8.9) compared to non-AD group 4.8 (0.3-22.2) (P = 0.015) whereas initial egg sIgE levels were higher [3.9 (1.34-15.9) vs 3.1 (0.9-12.8), (P = 0.001)]. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that AD is more frequent in egg allergic children however AD accompanies less frequently to CMA. Existence of egg allergy, high eosinophil percentage and egg sIgE levels increase the risk of AD in children with food allergy. Background: Food allergy (FA) is a rising problem worldwide. No previous studies of FA and food hypersensitivity have been conducted in Latvia. This study was done to study the symptoms that are supposed to be caused by FA, identify food allergens and tests used in diagnostics of FA in different age groups in children up to 3 years of age. Method: Retrospective descriptive study. Data was collected from January 2012 till December 2012 from randomly sampled medical documents from ambulatory allergy care in Children's clinical university hospital in Riga. Children 0-3 years old with suspected FA and different symptoms participated in the study. For statistic analysis MS Excel and IBM Statistics 20.0 programs were used. Results: Data from 100 medical documents was collected. Sixty-one percent boys, 39% girls. Sixty-five percent were infants. In 92% of patients symptoms started in the first year of life. Patients most commonly had positive tests to egg and milk (71% and 40% respectively). Specific IgE tests were used in 61% patients, skin prick tests in 51%, atopy patch tests (in combination with prick tests or specific IgE) in 20%. Oral food challenges were not done. The most common complaints were skin symptoms (98%) and gastrointestinal problems (10%). Ninety-four percent (n = 94) had atopic dermatitis, 3% (n = 3) anaphilactic reactions, 2% (n = 2) respiratory symptoms. Twelve percent of patients had symptoms from different organ systems. Conclusion: This study shows that egg and milk are the most common food allergens found in children 0-3 years old. Skin problems could be the most worrying complaints for parents, what might explain why almost all patients who came to allergologist with suspected food allergy had skin problems. Gastrointestinal symptoms are poorly recognised and evaluated as a sign of food allergy. Severe reactions and respiratory symptoms are rare. Oral food challenges are necessary tests for diagnosis of food allergy and must be conducted in Children's clinical university hospital in Riga. Background: Coexistence of food hypersensitivity is often observed in patients with aeroallergy. Principal method cure of aeroallergy is immunotherapy (SIT). Effectiveness of this therapy is assessed based on clinical symptoms abated. Sometimes we observed less effect this treatment, probably connected with coexistence of food hypersensitivity, which could be cross allergy or co-allergy. Aim: The aim of this study was assessment prevalence of food hypersensitivity in patients sensitised for aeroallergens. Methods: We analysis case history 55 patients with SIT for aeroallergens, in age 18 to 72 years (medium 55 years), 28 women and 27 man. Results: More frequently we observed allergy for several aeroallergens -32 patients. Only 23 patients have allergy for one aeroallergen. Most of patients was treated SIT for grass allergy -16 patients, dust mites -11, trees -10, trees and grasses -6, ragweed, cat -4, and for one to: grasses and ragweed, trees and ragweed, alternaria. Prevalence of food hypersensitivity in analyzing group of patients was 27.2% (15 patients). More frequently we observed food hypersensitivity in patients with pollen allergy -33.3% (13 patients). Oral allergy syndrome (OAS) was more common clinical manifestation of food hypersensitivity -12 patients. More frequently we observed food hypersensitivity for apple -10 patients, carrot -7, cherry -5, hazelnut -4, peach -4, nectarine -3, celery -3, strawberry -2, kiwi -2, curry -2, pear -2, walnut -2, and one for: on raspberry, egg, citrus, shrimp, beetroot, morello, cow milk. Conclusion: Prevalence of food hypersensitivity in patients treated with SIT for aeroallergens was 27.2%. More frequently it was observed in patients with plant allergy -33.3%. Coexistence food hypersensitivity in this group of patients could influence on less effective results of SIT, because probably food hypersensitivity is important element supporting of allergy process in this patients. Pattern and prevalence of allergen sensitisation to nuts in a paediatric allergy and asthma clinic Background: Nut allergies are often associated with the risk of anaphylaxis, especially in asthmatic subjects. A recent publication of the German anaphylaxis registry (NORA) identified peanut allergy as the main trigger of anaphylaxis in children. We were interested to assess the prevalence of nut allergen sensitisation and clinically relevant nut allergy in our paediatric allergy and asthma clinic. Method: Skin Prick Tests were performed over 19 years, in children and adolescents with asthma, AR or atopic eczema (n/gender: 2930 ♂/1786 ♀) and analysed retrospectively. Apart from sensitisation to common aeroallergens, sensitisation to nuts (peanuts, hazelnuts, walnuts and almonds) was also assessed. In the presence of a positive (histamine) and negative (diluent) control, weal size reactions >3mms were considered positive. In patients with positive skin prick tests to nuts, total-and nut allergen-specific IgE levels (Thermo Fisher ImmunoCap) were also measured. Results: Of 4716 tests analysed, 464 were positive to nuts. Two hundred and Eightynine (62.3%) were sensitised to peanuts, 273 (58.8%) to hazelnuts, 262 (56.5%) to almonds, and 117 (25.2%) to walnuts. Nut allergen sensitisation was significantly higher in boys than in girls (65.2% ♂ vs 34.8% ♀; P < 0.001). A clinically relevant nut allergy was diagnosed in 9.9% of patients. Of those, 35 patients (7.5%) were allergic to peanuts and 15 (3.2%) had developed anaphylaxis. Other clinically relevant nut allergies were observed in 11 patients. Nine (1.9%) were allergic to hazelnuts, including one with anaphylaxis. Only two patients were allergic to walnuts. Conclusion: Among children with asthma and other allergies, 9.9% were sensitised to nuts, with higher sensitisation rates in boys. A clinically relevant nut allergy was found in 9.9% of nut-sensitised individuals. Peanut was the leading nut allergen. In line with other Western countries, we observed a 1.0% prevalence rate of a clinically relevant nut allergy. Hen egg allergy, adult onset Nieto-Nieto, AM 1 ; Farias-Aquino, EG 1 ; Tob on-Franco, JD 1 ; Del Pozo, V 2 ; Vila-Albelda, C 1 ; Jim enez-Ruiz, C 1 ; Peña-Acevedo, Y 1 1 Allergy Unit, Hospital Universitario Fundaci on Alcorcon, Alcorcon, Spain; 2 Inmunology, Instituto de Investigaci on Sanitaria-Fundaci on Jim enez D ıaz, Madrid, Spain Introduction: Hen egg allergy is the second most common cause of allergy in children, with an estimated prevalence of 2% in children (1.3-2%) and 0.1% in adults. Its start in the adulthood is unusual. Most cases are encompassed in other syndromes. Methods: We describe three adult female patients with allergic reactions to hen egg proteins with debut in adult age and the allergy study performed. Conclusion: We report three patients with allergic reactions to hen egg proteins by IgE-mediated sensitivity. They debuted in adulthood, with correct previous tolerance to hen egg. We found sensitisation to differents white egg proteins: Ovalbumin -Ovotransferrin -Ovomucoid without Chicken serum albumin sensitisation. Others syndromes were discarded like as occupational factor or bird-egg syndrome. Comparative estimation of prevalence and duration of breast feeding in children in urban and rural families in Vinnitsa's region (Ukraine) Katilov, O; Dmytriiev, D; Chekotun, T; Koroleva, I; Dmytriiev, K Vinnitsa National Medical University, Pediatric No.1, Vinnitsa, Ukraine The purpose of our study was to assess the prevalence of breastfeeding in Vinnitsa's region and to analyze the factors influencing the duration of breastfeeding. Were conducted questionnaire survey in 617 mother of children aged from 1 to 2 years. We have developed a questionnaire included 65 questions relating to feeding of infants. Children living in the city amounted to 59.8% (No.369), in the village -40.2% (No.248). Among urban families 67.5% children were breastfed to 4 months, 47.4% from 4 to 6 months, 24.4%from 6 to 10 months, 16.7%from 10 to 12 months. Children in families living in the village had a significantly higher frequency of breastfeeding, respectively: 78.3%, 57.5%, 41.2 и 29.8%. Maximum duration of the breastfeeding were observed in rural population and comprised 18.0 AE 2.3 months, vs 14 AE 1.2 months in urban families. Our finding is similar to those in Ukraine in 2010 (Nyankovsky S.L. et al.) . The main reason in urban families for discounting breastfeeding in 64.0% of cases was the unwillingness of mother to breastfeed, while among rural familiesonly 18.2%. The reason for the transition to mixed feeding in urban families was the subjective feeling of breast milk deficit in mother (48.6%) and work or education of mother (27.2%), we have the opposite data in the rural families -24.5% and 68.3%. 8.4% of the children have already received an artificial mixture in the maternity hospital. Frequency of use of unupdated mixtures is significantly higher in rural families (38.6%), in comparance with urban families (11.6%). Duration of free feeding in urban families were 2.5 AE 0.4 months, in rural -3.4 AE 02 months. Urban mothers more frequently than rural used dummies in first 3 months children, respectively 63.2% and 54.4%. Up to date the supplementation with water or tea is used in children of first 3 months of life, respectively 12.7% in urban families and 19.4% in rural. Background: Most Japanese peoples are used to eat raw seafood in their daily lives. Seafood is often polluted by Anisakis simplex. Sensitisation to Anisakis is one of the relevant factors induced urticaria and anaphylaxis after ingestion seafood. Investigation how often sensitisation to Anisakis was detected in asthmatic patients had not been found so much. Method: We performed three independent studies about allergy to Anisakis in Japanese asthmatics. Subject of each study differed. Study 1: We performed the questionary survey about urticaria or anaphylaxis occurred after ingestion of seafood for 98 asthmatics. Study 2: We examined titer of specific IgE to Anisakis simplex in blood samples of 37 adult asthmatics. Study 3: Measurement of specific IgE to representative allergen components of Anisakis simplex such as Ani s1 and Ani s3 in blood samples of 211 adult asthmatics was performed. Results: Study1: 15 of 98 subjects had experienced allergic symptoms after eating Mackerel. Study2: Titers of specific IgE to Anisakis were increased in serum samples from 10 of 37 asthmatics. Those titers had tendency to be high in middle to high aged asthmatics that were used to eat raw seafood frequently. Titers of specific IgE to Anisakis were shown not to be correlated with titers of specific IgE to air pollutant such as house dust-mites. Study 3: Ani s1 was positive in serum samples from 4 of 211 subjects and Ani s3 were positive in serum samples from 2 of 211 subjects. Conclusion: It was generally known that severity of anaphylaxis in asthmatics inclined to be serious. To prevent anaphylaxis, it is important that detecting sensitised allergen could cause anaphylaxis should be performed exactly. Both detailed interview about patients' eating habits and testing specific IgE to Anisakis simplex was thought to be useful for screening of Anisakis allergy and then suggestion to avoid seafood likely to be polluted by Anisakis simplex might be considered for suspicious cases. Incidence of anaphylaxis among children in Tokyo based on a birth cohort study Background: Although many cross-sectional studies about incidence of anaphylaxis were reported around the world, few population-based prospective studies have been reported. Objective: The aim of this study is to examine the incidence of anaphylaxis and causal foods for the children at the age of 1 and 5 years. Methods: Data were extracted from a birth cohort study named as Tokyo-Children's Health, Illness and Development study which enrolled 1701 pregnant women and followed their 1550 children. The parents answered questionnaires about their children's anaphylaxis. The incidence of anaphylaxis was defined by the question, 'Has your child had anaphylaxis in the last 12 months?' We examined the incidence of anaphylaxis and causal foods against the children with the questionnaires at the age of one and 5 years. Results: Follow up rate was 88.3% at the age of 1 year and 90.3% at the age of 5 years. The incidence of anaphylaxis was 12.2% at the age of 1 year and 5.9% at the age of 5 years. In terms of foodinduced anaphylaxis, the prevalence of hen's egg-induced anaphylaxis was 5.3% and 1.9% at one and 5 years. The prevalence of cow's milk-induced anaphylaxis was 1.6% and 0.7% at one and 5 years. Out of 63 children who had hen's egginduced anaphylaxis at the ages of one, seven children developed the recurrence of hen's egg-induced anaphylaxis at the age of 5 years. Conclusion: Although the prevalence of anaphylaxis among 5-year-old children was lower than that among 1-year-old children, one-ninth of children experienced anaphylaxis induced by the same food both at the age of one and 5 years. Background: An Anaphylaxis Surveillance Project ASP was set up by the Food Allergy Referral Centre FARC involving ER and Pediatrics of eight hospitals in Veneto, Italy À4.5 M inhabitants. The aim is to get a perspective of incidence and prevalence of anaphylaxis through real-time registration of anaphylaxis. Method: This ASP acts through combining an interactive LDAP Oracle database with intensive regular training to ER and pediatrics staff and on-site monitoring on monthly basis. The database consists of electronic recording in realtime of acute episodes on the intranets and takes advantage of warnings based on shared presettled diagnostic and treatment criteria. Moreover patients admitted to hospitals through this system must be referred to FARC or local allergists. Results: From Sep'12 to Aug'13, 164 cases were registered, related to 107 adults (A) and 52 children (C). Incidence varies from 4 to 13/100 000 people per year. Reactions due to food consumption accounted for 68.8% in C and 34.5% in A, drug reactions for 14.6% in C and 33.6% in A. Treatment: IV corticosteroid 80.9% in A -50.3% in C, IV antihistamine 58.2% in A -48.1% in C fluid therapy 69.1% in A -35.2% in C. Adrenaline was used IM in 16.4% A -24.1% C, IV in 5.5% A -1.9% C, inhaled in 2.7% A -1.9% C. In 30.9% A and 33.3% C adrenaline was not administered despite warning pops-up recommendation. Moreover, 28% of patients were discharged within a period between 1 and 3 h after ER arrival and 39% of registered patients were not referred to an allergist. Conclusion: Realtime implementation of a dedicated data entry is mandatory for getting good quality data on anaphylaxis. Sharing diagnostic and treatment criteria and intensive ER staff trainings have partially compensated the pitfalls related to ER high turnover and busy logistics. Further training is needed to implement the system on a daily basis usage improving its impact on medication error avoidance, diagnostics, and therapeutic efficiency. Background: The frequency of anaphylaxis in children is estimated to be 0.14% in Japan. However, the clinical background and causes of anaphylaxis remain unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate details of anaphylaxis in children who visited the emergency room of Jikei University Daisan Hospital, located in western Tokyo, Japan, over a 5-year period. Method: Eighty-two children with anaphylaxis (46 boys, 36 girls) with a mean age of 5.4 years (range, 6 months to 15 years) were retrospectively analyzed. Results: The main causes of anaphylaxis were foods (81%), mainly in the form of eggs (29%), milk (12%), or peanuts (7%). Only 12% of children visited the emergency room within 30 min after symptom onset. The event typically occurred at home (72%) or at nursery school/kindergarten/school (15%). Cutaneous signs were present in 59% of patients and 30% showed respiratory signs as initial symptoms. Epinephrine injection was administered in 73%. Conclusion: Although prompt injection of epinephrine is recommended to save lives, only 12% visited our emergency room within 30 min after onset of allergic symptoms. These results suggest that education of patients, caregivers and teachers should be improved. Background: Pru p 3 is known as a lipid transfer protein (LTP), which is a class 1 food allergen responsible for peach allergy. A lower prevalence rate of peach allergy in patients with systemic allergic manifestations and reactivity to Pru p 3 has been reported in Japan (approx. 10%) compared to Europe (approx. 60%). Method: Four peach-allergic patients (case 1: aged 15, M; case 2: aged 12, M; case 3: aged 14, F; case 4: aged 13, F) with systemic reactions to peach, whom had been diagnosed by exercise stress testing at our division since July 2012, were tested for specific IgE to Pru p 1, 3, 4 using Immuno-CAP and IMMULITE â 2000 3gAllergy TM specific IgE assays. Results: All patients had positive skin prick tests (SPT) and basophil activation tests (CD203c) to raw fruit. The SPT demonstrated a positive reaction to heated fruit for cases 1, 3 and 4, and a somewhat weaker reaction for case 2. Cases 1, 2 and 4 were positive, whereas case 3 was negative to whole peach extract when analyzed by ImmunoCAP and 3gAllergy TM . The Im-munoCAP results showed that all the cases were negative to Pru p 3; on the other hand, 3gAllergy TM suggested that cases 1 and 2 were positive to Pru p 3. Case 1 was solely positive to LTP, case 2 was positive to LTP and profilin, and case 3 and 4 was negative to both by either of the assays. Conclusion: The results showed that 2 out of 4 patients who were negative to rPru p 3 by ImmunoCAP were positive to nPru p 3 in 3gAllergy TM assay, indicating the influence of different assay methodology on the study results. Peach allergy in patients with negative Pru p 3-specific IgE results by both assays may possibly be attributed to other antigens, such as Pru p 7. Breast feeding and infantile eczema before 6 month is high risk of sensitisation to egg white at 1 year of age in a high risk birth cohort in Chiba, Japan Nakano, T 1 ; Ozawa, N 1 ; Kojima, H 2 ; Yamamoto, T 1 ; Yamaide, F 1 ; Inoue, Y 1 ; Arima, T 1 ; Takemori, T 3 ; Kohno, Y 4 ; Shimojo, N 1 1 Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba City, Japan; 2 Higashi Koiwa Wanpaku Clinic, Tokyo, Japan; 3 Riken Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, Yokohama, Japan; 4 Chiba Rosai Hospital, Ichihara, Japan Background: The role of breastfeeding and infantile eczema in sensitisation to food allergen remains to be determined. Method: Three hundred and six healthy full term neonates born at the Chiba University Hospital or the Kawatetsu Chiba Hospital between April 2010 and February 2012 were enrolled. At least one family member had a history of atopic dermatitis, asthma, allergic rhinitis, or food allergy. At 1 year of age, serum specific IgEs (sI-gEs) to egg white were measured by Immu-noCap â . Factors related with sensitisation to egg white at 1 year of age were analyzed using multiple logistic regression analysis. Results: 33.2% were sensitised to egg white (sIgE > 0.7 U/ml) at 1 year of age. Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that infantile eczema before 6 months of age, breast feeding by 4 months of age and maternal history of allergy were significantly associated with sensitisation to egg white at 1 year of age (P = 0.001, P = 0.003 and P = 0.036, respectively). Furthermore, in subjects who had infantile eczema, almost exclusive breast feeding group had significantly higher positive rates of sensitisation to egg white compared to mixed feeding group (P = 0.002). In contrast, in subjects who did not have infantile eczema, there were no significant difference in sensitisation rates to egg white between almost exclusive breast feeding group and mixed feeding group (P = 0.59). Conclusion: Infantile eczema, breast feeding and maternal history of allergy were independent risk factors for egg white sensitisation at 1 year of age. The combination of infantile eczema and breast feeding was a highest risk factor for the egg white sensitisation at 1 year of age. These results suggest percutaneous sensitisation of egg white in breast-fed infants. Further study is needed to confirm our results. Characteristics of food allergic patients with negative compared to positive serology reported to the Norwegian Food Allergy Register Namork, E; Stensby, BA Department of Food, Water and Cosmetics, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway Background: The Norwegian Food Allergy Register has received 1045 reports submitted with blood samples. The patients were reported to experience allergic reactions, but 50% were negative with respect to specific IgE levels. We therefore examined other possible characteristics for individuals with negative vs positive serology. Method: Serum samples were tested for sIgE to 12 food allergens and two pollens. The demographic factors age and gender, and the physicians' information on symptoms, onset of reaction, and treatment were examined. Pollen allergies were recorded together with the most frequent incriminating food suspected or detected. Results: Cases with negative serology (NS) peaked at young adults aged 26 to 45 years, while cases with positive serology (PS) showed a higher frequency for the smallest children aged 0 to 5 years. For both groups, the ratio between genders shifted from 25: 75 female: male in children to the opposite in adults. Skin affections were the most frequent symptoms, while the most severe reactions involved the respiratory tract and loss of consciousness. The onset of reactions less than 1 h was 70% in NS, compared to 93% for children and 56% for the adults in PS. Treatment with adrenalin was used in 38% in NS and 49% in PS. Sensitisation to pollen was found to be 5% for the NS, 29% for the children and 85% for the adults in PS. Known asthma was reported for 17.5% with NS and 30% for all in PS. The incriminating food most often reported or detected were hazelnut and peanut. In addition, reactions to fruit and berries were frequently reported for NS and egg for the children in PS. Conclusion: Cases with negative vs positive serology peaked at different ages, showing opposite gender ratio. In NS, less frequent reports on asthma and lower incidence of sensitisation to pollen is apparent. This may suggest groups of individuals with different phenotypes, where PS may comprise a group of more atopic individuals with hypersensitivity reactions due to IgE binding. Background: Pinions are the seeds of Pinus pinea and consumed in various culinary presentations. Pinion allergy with other nuts especially peanuts and almonds, is well known, but the selective hypersensitivity is rare and pinion reactions after ingestion are usually systemic, including cases of anaphylaxis after skin testing with these nuts. Method: 25 year old male, after eat multiple foods like shrimp, walnut and pinion, after exercise had generalised urticaria, pruritus, lip and eyelid angioedema, dyspnea and wheezing, requiring emergency care, with intramuscular corticosteroids oxygen and fluid therapy administration. He had not taken NSAIDs, neither a concomitant infectious process. After this episode he has tolerated shrimp, seafood, fish, pistachio, sunflower seeds and almonds, pine nuts avoiding. Results: Blood test and biochemistry in normal limits, specific IgE to latex anisakis, echinococos shrimp and walnut: negative, serum tryptase within normality. Complement normal. Prick test to aeroallergens: Positive for olive, artemisia and LTP. Prick test with pinion: Positive. Conclusion: We report the case of a patient who presents anaphylaxis immediately after intake various foods, including the pinion, in the allergy study, selective hypersensitivity to this nut is evident, being negative for other food allergens, as well as a pollen sensitisation. After this episode he has tolerated all foods, including nuts, except pinions. In the literature reviewed the existence of cross-reactivity is confirmed between two pine species: Pinus cembra and Pinus pinea, and several antigenic determinants that may cause response in sensitised patients nuts. It should be noted that these bands are common, and can be as responsible panallergens for cross-reactivity in this food group. Given the observation of patients pollen phenotypes, we must be careful for the possible occurrence of systemic reactions to nuts, more frequently than in other individuals. An interesting case of parsley-related food anaphylaxis Bulut, _ I; € Ozs ßeker, ZF Immunology and Allergy, S€ ureyyapas ßa Chest Disease and Chest Surgery Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey Case: A.K, 31 years old woman, applied to our clinic with complaint of parsley allergy. She described symptoms of hoarseness, itching in mouth and ears, swelling at tounge and throath, difficulty in swallowing, dispnea, vertigo, loss of consciousness; 20 min after intake of parsley. It had happened 4 months ago. Method: Respiratory and food allergy panel has been carried out, along with skin prick test. No sensitisation has been detected. The patient was also subjected to a prick to prick test with fresh parsley puree. Ten min later, the patient developed symptoms like vertigo, respiratory distress, feeling of fullness in throat. The patient had to be evaluated in emergency conditions. Tension arterial was 80/40 mmHg. She was given 0.3 ml IM adrenalin, and intravenous fluid replacement was begun, along with other necessary anaphylaxis treatment medications. In clinical followup, the vital signs was stable. The prick test with parsley was positive with typical hyperemia and induration. The patient was given an 'adrenalin self-injection document' and taken to clinical follow-up. Results: Food allergies like parsley allergy can be seen in adults, although very rarely. It should be noted that this condition can cause serious life-threatening complications like anaphylactic shock. Conclusion: This necessiates for clinicians to question food allergy when taking medical history of the patients. We wanted to point ot the clinical significance of such incidents in the case of parsley allergy. Background: For the food allergy of infants of Japan, there is comparatively fewer soy bean anaphylaxis than an egg, milk and wheat. Recently it is reported that IgE to Gly m 5 and Gly m 6 is associated with severe allergic reactions to soybean in children. We examined a difference of soy bean specific IgE to Gly m 5, 6, 4 and 8 in the children induced anaphylaxis with the low allergenic fermented soybean food (Miso soup, and Nattou) and processed soy foods. Method: Specific IgE antibodies to Gly m 4, Gly m 5, Gly m 6, Gly m 8 was analyzed in sera from 11 Japanese children induced anaphylaxis with 6 fermented soy foods (2 cases by miso soup, 4 cases by Nattou) and 5 soy products (tofu, soy protein) aged 11 m~8 years old, and 8 nonsymptomatic cases aged 2-8 years old. All children were diagnosed either by food challenge or a clear history. Specific IgE antibodies to soybean, Gly m 4, Gly m 5, Gly m 6, Gly m 8 were measured by Immune-CAP. Results: Significant differences were noticed between the anaphylaxis cases and non-symptomatic group in sIgE. levels to soybean, Gly m 5, and Gly m 6 not in the sIgE level to Gym 8 and Gly m 4. Significant differences in the sIgE levels to Gly m 5 (P = 0.007) were detected between the anaphylaxis for fermented soy foods (66 AE 13 UA/ml) and soy products (13 AE 3.0 UA/ml), and significant differences (P = 0.0003) between non-symptomatic group (5.6 AE 2.5) . Specific IgE to Gy m 4 were negative in all soy anaphylaxis cases and on the other hand, were positive in two cases of non-symptomatic cases. Conclusion: In this study the levels of IgE responses to Gly m 5 were found to be associated with severe clinical reactions caused by fermented soybean in Japanese children. High IgE antibodies to Gly m 5 will therefore most likely better predict fermented soybean allergy. Gawro nska-Ukleja, EB; Ukleja-Sokołowska, NE; _ Zbikowska-Gotz, M; Bartuzi, Z Allergology, Immunology and Internal Diseases, Collegium Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Bydgoszcz, Poland Background: There are only few described cases of patients allergic to kaki. Kaki is a fruit of a persimmon tree. Kaki allergens identified so far are: profilin Dio k 4, a protein, 17 kDa, homologous to Bet v 1, food related allergen Bet v 6which isoflavone reductase (IFR). Method: 7.74 year old female experiences extensive skin lesions in a form of polymorphous urticaria on the upper extremities, lower extremities and neck, and oedema of both eyelids. The symptoms were followed by vomiting and diarrhea. Symptoms occurred 10 min after ingestion of second half of a kaki fruit. The first half was consumed on the previous day without any side effects. Patient never experienced any symptoms of allergy and the family history of allergic diseases was negative. Symptoms resolved after steroids i.v. and antihistamine drugs. Skin prick tests (SPT) were performed with food allergens. The skin prick test using a standardised kaki allergen was not performed since the standardised allergen extract was not available. Prick by prick test with fresh kaki fruit was performed. The patient had a detailed diagnosis using the immunoblotting method. Results: Skin prick tests (SPT) with food allergens were negative. The prick by prick test with fresh kaki fruit was positive (Histamine 6/15 mm, kaki 15/15 mm). In immunoblotting no positive signal was obtained. Conclusion: Prick by prick test enabled to objectively confirm the source of symptoms in patient. Although there was no signal in immunoblotting, we presume that it did not exclude the presence of specific antibodies against kaki protein extract and the results may be a consequence of their low concentrations in the blood serum tested and partial change in allergen particles due to protein denaturation. An interesting case; a kiwi allergy case in an adult that is not accompanied by latex allergy Bulut, _ I; € Ozs ßeker, ZF Immunology and Allergy, Sureyyapas ßa Chest Disease and Chest Surgery Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey Case: (H, S) 62 years old woman, applied to our clinic with complaint of kiwi allergy. She had a history of rhinitic complaints for 25 years. Two months before applying to our clinic, she had experienced symptoms like hoarseness, itching in mouth and ears, swelling in tounge and throath, difficulty swallowing, dispnea; 20 min after eating kiwi. Method: The patient was subjected to respiratory and food allergen test panel and a skin prick test was done. No sensitisation has been detected. To rule out a cross reactivity with latex, a prcik test has been done and it was found negative. The latexspecific IgE was found to be negative as well. The patient was also subjected to another prick test using fresh fruit with prick to prick method. Result: When evaluated 20 min later, a hyperemic area of 13 9 11 mm diameter has been observed as a reaction to kiwi. The kiwi allergy has been confirmed with skin prick test. The patient has been given a document for 'self-injection of adrenalin' and was taken to clinical follow-up. Conclusion: We wanted to point out with this kiwi allergy unaccompanied by latex allergy case that the food allergy can be observed in adult population too, a history of food allergy should be noted as significant when taking a medical history. Celery-dependent exercise induced anaphylaxis confirmed only by BAT Background: Food Dependent exercise induced anaphylaxis (FDEIA) is an IgE mediated hypersensitivy requiring both intake of food and consecutive exercise to induce symptoms of anaphylaxis. FDEIA is associated with symptoms like collapse and/or upper respiratory tract obstruction, flushing or urticaria and severe allergic reactions such as shock or hypotension. This article describes a case of exercise induced anaphylaxis ocurring after ingesti-ion of celery. A 48-year old previosly healthy woman was admitted to hospital after an anaphylactic reaction. The symptoms occurred during interval training. Before the run, she had eaten chiken soup with celery. She began to exercise 20 min after the meal, and developed the symptoms after 10 min of exercise. She had a history of allergy to penicilin, pollen, mugwort and grass. Method: Skin prick test. ISAC, HR-urticaria test, InmunoCAP test, BAT with cooked and raw celery. Exercise provocation test with og without celery. Results: Skin prick test was positive for grass, mugwort and dog. No reaction to food allergens. ISAC for celery negative. In an exercise provocation test, preceded by ingestion of fresh celery, the patiient developed angio-edema after 45 min. She was treated with prednisolone and monitored in a hospital for 24 h. Exercise provocation test without celery was negative. Basophil Activation Test was positive with raw and cooked celery. ImmunoCAP specific IgE was negative, and no antigens could be detected in a western blot with patient 0 s serum. Conclusion: FDEIA can be diagnosis by a careful evaluation of the patient 0 s history, including careful questioning about temporal relationship to foods. In this case, a specific BAT could confirm the clinical sensitisacion. The principles and applications of the BAT have recently extensively been reviewed elsewhere. Treatment of food dependent exercise induced anaphylaxis centers about recognition of the events necessary to produce the attack. Avoidance of a food or group of foods for a given period of time before of after exercise can be preventive. Prior therapy with antihistamines appears to have little effect on the subsequent episode. Alphagal and mammalian meat specific-IgE in mammalian meat tolerant tick anaphylaxis sufferers van Nunen, SA 1,2 ; Mullins, R 3 ; Baumgart, K 4 ; Fernando, S 1,5 ; Fulton, R 6 ; Ratchford, A 7 ; Broady, K 8 ; Basten, A 9 1 Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Royal North Shore Australia. Allergic reactions provoked by tick bites include delayed mammalian meat anaphylaxis and immediate tick-induced anaphylaxis. Individuals allergic to mammalian meat after tick bites (first reported by van Nunen et al., 2007) possess IgE directed against alphagal (Commins et al., 2009) , and mammalian meat. Whilst several tick salivary proteins have been characterised in the sera of those with anaphylaxis to Ixodes holocyclus (Broady et al., 2011) there are currently no commercially available assays for tick salivary allergens. The presenting author noted that mammalian meat specific-IgE was detectable in tick anaphylaxis sufferers (van Nunen et al., 2012) . Alphagal has recently been found in the gastrointestinal tract of Ixodes ricinus (Hamsten et al., 2013) . The aim of this study was to examine the frequency of IgE directed against alphagal and mammalian meat in individuals with tick anaphylaxis who are both tolerant of, and regularly ingesting, mammalian meat. Method: Specific IgE directed against alphagal and mammalian meat was measured by Immunocap â in tick anaphylaxis sufferers who were both tolerant of mammalian meat and were regularly ingesting mammalian meat (defined as consumption of mammalian meat 2-3 times weekly). Results: The sera of 41 mammalian meat tolerant patients with tick anaphylaxis were examined. Of these 41 patients, 37/41 (90%) had either or both alphagal and mammalian meat specific IgE detected. Of the 26/41 who had alphagal estimations, 24/26 (93%) had detectable anti-alphagal IgE (1/26 [3.8%] without co-existing mammalian meat specific IgE). 36/41 (90%) had mammalian meat specific IgE present. Of the 36/41 tick anaphylaxis sufferers with IgE specific for mammalian meat, 36/36 (100%) had beef specific IgE, 34/36 (94%) had mutton specific IgE and 35/36 (97%) had pork specific IgE present in their sera. Conclusion: In our study, the majority of patients with tick bite anaphylaxis had IgE directed against alphagal and/or mammalian meat, despite tolerating regular consumption of mammalian meat. In the absence of commercially available tests for tick salivary protein specific IgE, measurements of alphagal and mammalian meat specific IgE may serve as a useful surrogate in vitro marker in confirming a diagnosis of anaphylaxis due to Ixodes holocyclus. Background: Intramuscular (IM) epinephrine is the current standard treatment for anaphylaxis. Injection into the vastus lateralis muscle provides more rapid onset and higher peak plasma concentrations than subcutaneous routes. Most episodes of anaphylaxis occur outside of medical facilities and therefore require the use of epinephrine autoinjectors (EAI). Given the increasing epidemic of obesity affecting adults and children in Europe, we assessed whether the current commonly used EAIs have adequate needle length to ensure intramuscular delivery. The two common EAIs in the UK are Epipen with needle length 15.03 mm and Jext pen with needle length 15.36 mm. Method: Patients who had already been prescribed EAIs for a clinical history of anaphylaxis were examined with ultrasound (US) and measurements of subcutaneous tissue at anterolateral thigh, anterior thigh and deltoid areas were performed. Results: Twenty-eight patients took part in the study with female to male ratio 23:5 and age range 18-75 years. BMI ranged from 18-44 and skin to muscle distance for vastus lateralis ranged from 66 mm to 335 mm. In 19 patients (68%) the skin to muscle distance was significantly greater than EAI needle length. This number was reduced to 46% for the anterior thigh and to 18% for the deltoid area. Conclusion: Jext and Epipens do not have sufficient needle length to administer IM adrenaline in 68% of our patient group using the vastus lateralis site. We would recommend that when epinephrine is prescribed, a clinical assessment should be made of subcutaneous depth and if in doubt an US should be performed. In Emergency Departments or Respiratory Clinic this would be facilitated by the routine presence of hand held US equipment. Pharmaceutical companies also need to consider producing EAIs with longer needle length. Anaphylaxis: a diagnosis we 0 re allergy to? Deiratany, S; Collier, JD Children's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland Background: Anaphylaxis describes a potentially life threatening hypersensitivity reaction of acute onset. It is a condition that is under-reported internationally due to a failure by patients and healthcare professionals to properly recognise its signs and symptoms. We aimed to audit the recognition and management of patients presenting with anaphylaxis to our Emergency Department (ED) by retrospectively applying World Allergy Organisation (WAO) criteria for the diagnosis of anaphylaxis. Method: We conducted a retrospective chart review of patients discharged from the ED from January 2007 to December 2012 with a diagnosis of 'anaphylaxis' as noted on our clinical information system. Results: Twenty-six patients (19 males, seven females, mean age 6.6 years) met the criteria. Notes were unavailable for one patient. Six patients did not meet the WAO criteria for diagnosis of anaphylaxis. Nuts were the most common allergen cited in the patient's history. 19 (100%) patients met WAO criteria: 2 (10.5%) were administered with adrenaline by a parent before arrival at the ED, 1 (5.3%) received from an ambulance crew en route to the ED, 4 (21%) were administered adrenaline by a general practitioner, and 3 (15.8%) had adrenaline prescribed and administered in ED after presentation. 9 (47.4%) patients did not receive adrenaline. With regard to discharge instructions and follow-up for this group, 9 (47.4%) patients had clearly documented follow-up with various clinics and care-givers. Nine patients (47.4%) were discharged with a prescription for an adrenaline pen. Conclusion: Anaphylaxis is an under recognised phenomenon, and in this department there were wide variations in its treatment and follow-up. Improvements in recognition will result from education and training of medical and nursing staff, the use of proforma documentation guiding treatment where anaphylaxis is suspected, improved discharge instructions and the provision of adrenaline pen training for parents and children by ED staff. Background: Food-dependent exerciseinduced anaphylaxis (FDEIAn) is considered rare. It is a potentially life-threatening syndrome where allergic symptoms appear when exercise is performed within hours after ingesting a particular food source. For fish as the culprit food-source only few cases has been reported. For the diagnostics of FDEIAn the clinical history is often sufficient. However an exercise challenge can be necessary to reproduce the symptoms. Nevertheless there is a lack of validated exercise protocols and often a lack of reproducibility of symptoms. Method: A 34-year old male presented in the clinic with a medical history of a severe allergic reaction after ingestion of pasta and salmon followed by a run. The patient was first tested with SPT and IgE for gluten and salmon. Then the patient was challenged with 200 grams of pasta followed by exercise 30 min after ingestion. Afterwards the patient was challenged with 100 grams of salmon followed by exercise and finally the patient was challenged with 200 grams of salmon followed by exercise. Results: There was no allergic reaction to the first two challenges with pasta (gluten) and 100 grams of salmon. However the challenge with 200 grams of salmon elicited an anaphylactic reaction with universal itching, vomiting, oedema, drop in peak flow and decreased blood pressure. The patient responded well to Epinephrine. A possible co-factor could be that the patient had used 400 mg of NSAID due to a lower back pain the morning of the final challenge. Conclusion: Even though it is questionable whether the patient responded to the additional amount of allergen or the reaction was facilitated by the NSAID it is clear that the patient did not respond to 100 grams of allergen followed by exercise. It is therefore shown that it is difficult to exclude an allergy diagnose through an oral food challenge even though the challenge is performed with similar settings as the medical history (i.e. exercise in this case). Background: Severe reactions are a main concern of OIT. Method: To characterise cases who required Intensive Care Unit admission for anaphylaxis to OIT doses among patients aged 5-18 on CM-OIT (N = 80) or egg-OIT (N = 50). Results: Case 1: An egg-allergic boy aged 12 experienced severe bronchoconstriction, hypotension and hypoxaemia, followed by urticaria, 1 h after an scheduled dose increase on 4th month of OIT in our Unit (1.8 g egg protein). Immediate treatment was given (adrenaline -3 doses-, salbutamol, hydroxicine, saline, steroids). Ventilation was needed for 8 h. He denied initial symptoms. Fasting and mild exercise -walk-might have acted as co-factors. He had well-controlled asthma on 'ICON step 3' treatment. Pre-OIT egg white-IgE: 75 kU/l. Case 2: A CM-allergic boy aged 14 had vomiting, urticaria, bronchoconstriction and hypotension leading to unconsciousness minutes after having 3.8 g CM protein on 5th month of OIT at home. Despite early im adrenaline, he needed advanced resuscitation and ventilation for 48 h. He had skipped OIT doses for 3 days and mistakenly increased his dose in 0.8 g. He had asthma on 'step 3' treatment, which became partly controlled since OIT start. Pre-OIT casein-IgE: 195 kU/l. Case 3: A CM-allergic boy aged 15 had dyspnea and dizziness, which progressed to hypotension, unconsciousness and respiratory arrest minutes after having 6 g CM protein on 17th month of OIT. Resuscitation and adrenaline were applied at ambulance. Ventilation was needed for 28 h. He was not carrying adrenaline. Fasting and mild exercise were involved. He had uncontrolled asthma on 'step 4' treatment. Controller medication compliance was poor and he had started smoking. Pre-OIT casein-IgE: >100 kU/l. Conclusions: Patients who had life-threatening reactions to OIT share common features: teenager, high specific IgE, persistent asthma -poorly controlled in two cases-and risky attitudes. OIT involves high risks in such patients. Strict monitoring is essential. Background: Allergic reactions to poultry meat, including chicken and turkey, are rare, while allergic reactions to poultry products such as feathers and eggs are more common. The symptoms range from oral allergy syndrome to anaphylactic reactions. We present a patient with turkey meat allergy without any history of other allergies. Method: An obtained history from a 23year-old female suggested turkey meat as the cause of her symptoms. She developed abdominal cramping 15 min after ingestion of turkey meat as well as chicken meat, suggesting turkey meat as the causal agent. The patient had never been diagnosed with asthma and was not sensitised to any common respiratory allergens. The results of specific IgE testing and a turkey food challenge is presented. No allergen skin prick testing was performed. In addition, turkey extract was prepared from turkey meat, separated by SDS PAGE and assessed for IgE reactivity by immunoblotting. Results: ImmunoCAP Specific IgE was positive for turkey and increased by more than 50% (from 0.44 kUA/l to 0.67 kUA/ l) after a food challenge with 100 g of turkey meat. Assessment of turkey extract for sIgE reactivity in immunoblotting suggested specific, but weak recognition of 2-3 bands, the identity of which remain open so far. Conclusion: This case describes an IgEmediated type-1 allergic reaction to turkey. The patient was not egg allergic and was not tested for other poultry meats as she did not report any other symptoms. This case outlines the importance of a detailed history in determining possible causative agents of allergic reactions with the use of IgE testing and food challenge. We confirmed the results using Western blot. Cross-reactivity between goose, duck, turkey and chicken meat has previously been demonstrated. Our patient tolerated duck meat but has not been challenged with goose meat. Anaphylaxis to bay boletus Leon Suarez, I 1 ; Prucha, H 1,2 ; Kugler, C 1 ; Brockow, K 1,3 ; Ring, J 1,2 ; Darsow, U 1,3 1 Klinik und Poliklinik f€ ur Dermatologie und Allergologie am Biederstein, Technische Universit€ at M€ unchen, Munich, Germany; 2 Christine K€ uhne-Center for Allergy Research and Education, Hochgebirgklinik Davos, Munich/Davos, Germany; 3 ZAUM -Zentrum f€ ur Allergie und Umwelt, Technische Universit€ at M€ unchen, Munich, Germany Background: We report the case of a 25year-old female, that suffered from a systemic anaphylactic reaction. In the evening, about 30 min after dinner, she showed a generalised urticaria, itching of the nose and mouth mucosa, difficulty swallowing, feeling of a lump in the throat and dyspnea. She was treated emergently. The dinner of the patient consisted of a mushroom omelette with salt, pepper, eggs and selfcollected bay boletus and coffee. Other foods that were consumed at the same day by the patient have been eaten since then and tolerated again. Cofactors, such as infections, alcohol or physical exertion, were not involved. Furthermore the patient has a ciprofloxacin-hypersensitivity, a seasonal allergic rhinoconjunctivitis to pollen from grasses after immunotherapy, atopic eczema, an allergy to animal hair and an oral allergy syndrome to nuts. Results: Prick-to-prick tests (PP) to the homemade bay boletus omelette eaten by the patient before the reaction and to bay boletus (Boletus badius) were positive, as well as to shiitake, oyster mushroom und champignon (Agaricus campestris). Total IgE level was 341 UI/ml and sIgE was positive to grasses and birch pollen, cat dander and hazelnut. An oral challenge test with omelette without bay boletus was performed and well tolerated. Other prick test negative fungi such as mushroom (Agaricus bisporus) chanterelle and cep were also well tolerated. An oral provocation test with the culprit and with the prick positive fungi was not performed due to the primary severe reaction. With avoidance of the PP positive mushrooms, no further reactions occurred. An allergen characterisation of boletus badius is currently being attempted. Conclusion: Due to the patient 0 s history and the positive skin test results we diagnosed an allergy to bay boletus. Bay boletus (Boletus badius) is a species of fungus in the family of boletus. Boletus is a genus of mushroom, comprising over 100 species. Bay boletus are popular and common edible mushrooms in Germany. To our knowledge an allergy has not been published yet. In recent years, some reports of fungi allergies, especially on Boletus edulis (cep, yellow boletus) have been published. In our case, yellow boletus was well tolerated. A possible cross allergy could not be shown here. TPS 18 -Food allergy prevention and management 705 Nutritional strategies for preventing food allergyselecting the target population Vivisenco, I; Ulmeanu, C Emergency Hospital for Children Grigore Alexandrescu, Toxicology-ICU, Bucharest, Romania Background: Food allergy most often affects infants and young children, sometimes with major impact on nutritional status. The aim of this study is to analyze the family history in infants with acute allergic accidents triggered by food. Method: The authors have studied acute allergic accidents triggered by food in children aged under 1 year admitted in the Toxicology-ICU Department of Emergency Hospital for Children 'Grigore Alexandrescu', Bucharest in a period of 24 months. We noted in all cases age, gender, family history of allergy, data of food anamnesis, signs and symptoms of illness. We identified food allergens by corroborating history (recent dietary attempts) with physical examination and laboratory data (specific IgE). Results: Between May 2011 and April 2013, 24 infants (13 boys, 11 girls) were admitted in the department with a diagnosis of acute allergic accident. We identified the following clinical forms: acute urticaria, angioedema, immediate gastrointestinal reactions, anaphylaxis. Cow 0 s milk proteins (CMP) were the allergic trigger in most cases (n = 16, 66.7%). We found a family history positive for allergy in 21 cases (87.5%). Eleven of these had at least two first-degree relatives (parents, siblings) with a history positive for allergy. Fifteen patients with CMP allergy had a positive family history. Conclusion: Food allergy is a major concern for specialists in pediatrics, allergology and immunology. Selecting the population at risk based on family history and development of nutritional strategies for preventing the onset of food allergy in the first years of life are key issues in the management of this condition. Background: Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is a functional disorder that affects with clinical history of abdominal pain/discomfort, associated with alteration of the hive. A nickel-related pro-inflammatory status has been documented at intestinal mucosal level. The aim of this study was to evaluate the possible association between IBS and amount of nickel taken with their usual diet, and in a pilot group to assess whether a low nickel content diet obtained an improvement of symptoms. Method: Seventy-five patients with a diagnosis of IBS were included in the study. The patients filled a validated food/symptom diary for 2 weeks, and the data obtained were analyzed to evaluate a possible statistically significant association between the days in which they had symptoms and the intake of high nickel content (HNC) diet. The patients were then divided into two subgroups, IBS-constipated (IBS-C, 12 pts) and IBS-diarrhea (IBS -D, 63 pts) based on the Rome III criteria. Results: An association between symptomatic days and HNC diet was statistically significant in each subgroup. The results showed that the patients had a statistically significant association (P = 0.002) between diet days with HNC and the presentation of symptoms. Furthermore, the data have corroborated the presence of a limit threshold to define an ANC diet, equal to 600 lg/day, which had been derived through animal studies, but had never been validated for the man. Comparing subgroups separately IBS-D and IBS -C, the association between symptomatic days/ HNC diet resulted statistically significant only in the first group (P < 0.001 vs P = 0.119), in agreement with the hypothesis that the contact between the intestinal mucosa and Nickel can activate an inflammatory response in Ni-sensitive subjects. The second part of the study included 11 patients with IBS-D, who, after complet-ing a free diet food/symptoms, has been proposed a diet considered low nickel content (LNC), during which it was required to recompile the diary to compare the number of days with symptoms in the two different diets. Patients who have joined in a satisfactory manner to the diet showed an improvement in the presentation of symptoms, turned out to be statistically significant (P = 0.046). Conclusion: The results of this study suggest that a low nickel content diet can lead to an improvement of gastrointestinal symptoms, but more studies are needed for comparison with a control group for confirmation. Background: Despite all the undertaken measures, the prevalence of food intolerance (allergy/pseudo allergy) is increasing every year. It is necessary to consider that dermal syndrome is only a fraction of its symptoms. The greater part of themare gastrointestinal manifestations, frequently underestimated and undiagnosed. Therefore, the symptoms of food allergy are masked and burdened by accompanying diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. The aim: To establish whether the correction of the gastrointestinal pathology affects the course of food allegy. Method: During the two-stage prospective study, we picked 54 patients with severe food allergy in history from 312 examined cases. Age of the respondents ranged from 17 to 65 years, with an average of 35.0 + 3.2 years. Male/female = 35.2%/ 64.8%, respectively. Two groups were formed: with the proven food allergy (31) and the alleged pseudoallergic reactions (23). The inclusion criteria for the first group was as followselevated levels of IgE or IgG4 to food products, typical anamnestic data (beginning at a young age, dose-independent reaction). Subsequently therapy of the discovered diseases of the gastrointestinal tract such as GERD, gastro, helminthic infestations, giardiasis, bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine, large intestine dysbiosis was conducted. The results of the treatment were assessed at 6 months. Result: At the moment, 12 people underwent a full course of therapy, seven people from the group with the proven food allergies and five with pseudoallergic reactions. Only 1 (14.3%) patient with a true food allergy, not noted improvement in disease course, in other 11 cases we registered a positive dynamics in the course of the food allergy in a varying degree. Three patients (60%) with pseudoallergic reactions observed complete absence of symptoms of food intolerance for 6 months after treatment. Conclusion: Despite the small sampling, the data suggest that: Correction of the pathology of the gastrointestinal tract has undoubted beneficial effect (91.6% of cases) on the course of the food allergy. However, the most significant improvement in the state (up to complete relief of the symptoms) is seen in the cases with pseudoallergic reactions to food. This pattern may be used as a standard procedure in the differential diagnosis. Background: Food allergy is the most common atopy manifestation in early childhood. This food allergy triggers atopic dermatitis in 30-40% of all children affected. Standard of care involves an exclusion diet that reduces symptoms, but this diet has a risk to be nutritionally incomplete. Sinlac is a rice and carob based infant cereal, allergens-free, offering full nutritional support for children suffering from food allergies. Apple polyphenols have previously shown some effect on mitigating allergic reactions. Objective: Investigate the safety and tolerability of Sinlac cereals (AE apple polyphenols) in infants with atopic symptoms. Methods: The clinical trial is an open labeled study (NCT01029184) to assess tolerance (symptoms stability) of Sinlac cereals compared to well-known allergenic foods during an open allergenic test enrolling 51 infants (4 to 40 months) with atopic symptoms (positive skin prick test or positive RAST-IgE or positive patch test). Primary endpoint was the risk of positive reaction to the allergenic tests. Study products were Sinlac, Sinlac + apple polyphenol extract (0.3% in matrix), wheat, potatoes, cow's milk and hen's egg. Results: Fourty-eight subjects completed the study. Both Sinlac and Sinlac + Apple polyphenol extract were significantly better tolerated by atopic infants compared to other allergenic foods: allergic reactions were 2% with Sinlac and Sinlac + Apple polyphenols and 49% with wheat, potatoes, cow's milk and hen egg. Valid conclusions and inferences can be drawn even though the number of subjects analyzed (51 in ITT) was lower than those supposed to complete the study. Conclusion: Sinlac and Sinlac containing apple polyphenols are safe and well tolerated by atopic infants and children. Future studies are needed to assess the efficacy of addition of apple polyphenols to infant cereals such as Sinlac on managing atopic symptoms. Withdrawal of immunosuppressive drug decreased serum IgE levels in food allergy and eosinophilic gastroenteritis after cord blood stem cell transplantation with tacrolimus therapy Inoue, Y 1 ; Morita, Y 1 ; Arima, T 1 ; Shimojo, N 1 ; Kohno, Y 2 1 Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; 2 Chiba Rosai Hospital, Ichihara, Japan Introduction: We previously reported patients who developed food allergy (FA)related gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms after cord blood stem cell transplantation (CBSCT) using tacrolimus (FK506). We herein report on a successful therapeutic management of a patient with FA and eosinophilic gastroenteritis after CBSCT in whom elimination diet switch from FK506 to cyclosporine (CsA) decreased serum levels of IgE, allowing food reintroduction. Case: A 2-month-old Japanese male was diagnosed with familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 3. At 7 months of age, CBSCT was performed. GVHD prophylaxis consisted of FK506 and shortterm methotrexate. By age 15 months, he occasionally experienced vomiting and frequent diarrhea. A food challenge test with egg caused severe hives. Consequently, we diagnosed him to have egg allergy. GI endoscopy showed edema of the entire esophageal wall and erythema with dense eosinophilic infiltration in the walls of the stomach, duodenum and colon. As his total IgE was getting increased to 4461 IU/ ml when he was 23 months old, we decided to switch his immunosuppressive drug from FK506 to CsA. He rapidly responded with an improved appetite, and his total IgE decreased to 408 IU/ml. His total IgE decreased further to 82 IU/ml after he stopped taking CsA due to its side effect 9 months later. When he was 42 months old, he showed negative food challenges to egg, milk and soy bean. Thus, he returned to have a regular diet. Conclusion: In addition to an elimination diet, switching or withdrawal of FK506 may improve FA and eosinophilic gastroenteritis after CBSCT with FK506 therapy. A case report: management of maternal anaphylaxis in pregnancy Yasunobu, T 1 ; Mitsuo, N 2 ; Masayuki, N 3 ; Urara, N 4 1 Sapporo Tokushukai Hospital, Allergy, Sapporo, Japan; 2 Pediatrics, Sapporo Tokushukai Hospital, Sapporo, Japan; 3 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sapporo Tokushukai Hospital, Sapporo, Japan; 4 Internal Medicine, Sapporo Tokushukai Hospital, Sapporo, Japan Introduction: Anaphylaxis is a rare event during pregnancy, but it may trigger maternal hypotension leading to intrapartum asphyxia and eventually, predisposing fetus to the risk of severe fetal brain damage. We report a case of maternal anaphylaxis which might be caused by a suspected food allergy and its management is discussed. Case report: A 26-year-old female (grav-ida2, para1) in 25 weeks of gestation, with a medical history of atopic dermatitis, but without a history of any food allergies or anaphylaxis, was brought to the emergency department because of dyspnea, generalised itchy rash, abdominal pain, and severe uterine contractions. She reported that she ate Japanese soba, fish, shrimp, crabs and vegetables, and developed the symptoms starting within 15-30 min. Her blood pressure was 104/72 mmHg, heart rate 112, respiratory rate 40, SPO2 100% (under supplemental 100% oxygen), and she was immediately treated by normal saline infusion, epinephrine i.m. injection two times, and additional H1-antihistamine, methylprednisolone. Obstetrically, fetal heart rate was almost normal (140-160 bpm) with variability and ultrasonography showed a vital fetus in the absence of fetal distress. Biphasic reaction of anaphylaxis did not occur and the patient rapidly recovered. On day 7, the patient was discharged. After 11 weeks, the baby was born without neurological deficiency. We could not disclose the cause of anaphylaxis in the mother. Discussions: Anaphylaxis is a relatively infrequent event during pregnancy, but maternal hypoxemia and hypotension can develop a potential risk of life-threating event to both a mother and a fetus. We should immediately commence measures to prevent further development of anaphylaxis reaction and fetus brain damage. Patients may require administration of intravenous vasopressors or caesarean delivery. More investigations toward the pharmacologic management and consensus for better directions in anaphylaxis treatment during pregnancy are necessary. Background: Cow's milk (CM) oral immunotherapy (OIT) use has increased in recent years, and has proven to be an effective procedure. However, studies about long-term evolution are limited. Objective: To evaluate long-term evolution of OIT, including dietary impact, adverse reactions, and patient's family satisfaction. Method: Fifty-two patients that had undergone a CM OIT treatment were included. All patients had fulfilled the treatment at least 4 years before the study period. Clinical and laboratory data was reviewed. Follow-up data was collected by means of a questionnaire. Patients were asked about daily CM consumption and symptoms associated with ingestion. Current family satisfaction was expressed as a value from 0 (lowest) to 10 (highest). Daily intake: unlimited in 19 patients (36.6%), one dairy serving plus free diet in 32 (61.5%), and less than one serving in 1 (1.9%). Thirty-six patients (69.2%) enjoyed drinking CM, while 43 (82.7%) tolerated cheese. Adverse reactions: 15 (28.8%) had three or more episodes, 10 patients (19.2%) suffered <3 episodes, while 27 patients (51.9%) denied any adverse reaction. Symptoms were mild (64%), moderate (16%) and severe (20%). Triggers: unapparent (52%), exercise (24%), infec-tions (16%) and other (8%). Current level of satisfaction: mean 9.8 (range 7-10). Conclusions: Isolated adverse reactions after OIT are not uncommon, but they are mostly mild. Satisfaction with the treatment is very high. A third of patients have unlimited dairy intake, but many patients chose to keep a minimum daily ingestion of CM in order to ensure a free diet. Periodic controls are required in order to provide personalised instructions to each patient. The formation and development of an electronic food sensitivity knowledge network Background: There are significant gaps in knowledge and awareness about food allergy. Better risk assessment, management and communication requires cooperative working between many different stakeholder groups. Organisational culture, professional focus, lack of capacity and even lack of esteem have prevented sufficiently close working relationships. We describe the formation and development of an electronic food sensitivity knowledge network as a model for multidisciplinary working for the benefit of people with food sensitivity. Method: The Food Allergy and Food Intolerance Network established a presence in cyberspace and aims to improve the quality of life of those with food allergies or food intolerance and reduce the risk of anaphylaxis, make it easier for food companies to supply safe food for sufferers, and promote exchange of knowledge. Results: The Network has grown to over 400 members and achieved successes as follows. Regulation: The island of Ireland encompasses two jurisdictions. To avoid consumers and businesses being impacted upon by two different approaches to the new Food Information Regulation the Network facilitated the regulators in each jurisdiction to work together to avoid discrepancies and differences. Risk Management in Catering: Providing information on allergens and catering for people with allergies is daunting for many in the catering sector. The Network commissioned a professional film maker to make three 10 min videos, freely available on YouTube. These demonstrate how life can be made better and safer for people with allergies in the catering sector. Supporting Patient Support Groups: Allergy Awareness Week is a key means by which Allergy N I disseminates and influences on behalf of people with food allergies. Working together we made an impact with the media and politicians that, alone, we could not have achieved. Political Awareness: The Network has worked with the All Party Group on Science at the Northern Ireland Parliament to host talks and discussions on allergy helping to raise political awareness. Conclusion: The work and development of the Network include the functionality of the social medium electronic base and the interpersonal relationships built up within and outside of cyber space. The Network has grown and proved to be a valuable resource and influenced on behalf of people with allergies and intolerances. It is hoped that further synergies can be grown by joint working with EAACI in the future. Background: A high percentage of the population has symptoms consistent with allergies. In recent years an increasing number of people reported various food allergy symptoms. The diverse forms of allergy presentation led us to propose learning if the general population is aware of our specialty and explore the extent of their knowledge regarding food allergy. Method: Participants were asked to complete an anonymous questionnaire which asked for basic socio-demographic information (age, sex, educational level, presenting allergy, habitat), and various questions about food allergy (general, fruits, eggs, nuts, anisakis, spices and treatment of the reaction). There were 16 questions with three choices and a single correct answer. Scoring was as follows: correct answer +1, incorrect answer À1 and do not know/no answer 0. Results: A total of 320 people completed the questionnaire (128 men, 40%) with a mean age of 20 years. Ninety-nine (31%) were considered allergic and 100% of these had been seen by a doctor for this reason. A total of 207 (65%) were university students. A total of 125 (39%) expressed interest in the subject of allergies. One hundred of those surveyed reported searching the Internet regarding health questions. The final average score was four points (out of 16). Thirty-one percent believed that celiac disease is an allergic disease. Only 44% (140) knew that there are allergies to spices (such as oregano and mustard). Seventeen percent thought that individuals allergic to the olive tree cannot eat olives. Seventy-five percent knew that anisakis is a fish-borne parasite, although only 38% knew that vinegar does not kill it. Fifty-two percent did not know there are egg allergies that allow consumption of the yolk. Just 12% knew that some people who are allergic to latex should avoid tropical fruits. Sixty-two percent knew that people allergic to fruit peel can sometimes tolerate eating the peeled fruit. Sixty percent did not know whether those allergic to wild cereals can eat bread and 48% did not know that adrenaline can be life-saving in a severe reaction. Conclusion: Overall, the general population has scant knowledge about food allergy. The low success rate on some questions leads us to emphasize the importance of health education about diseases that are increasingly prevalent in the general population. The effect of processing on the allergenicity of mealworm proteins Broekman, H 1 ; Knulst, A 1 ; den Hartog Jager, S 1 ; Gaspari, M 2 ; de Jong Govardus, A 3 ; Houben, G 3 ; Verhoeckx, K 3 1 University Children's Hospital, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands; 2 Universit a 'Magna Graecia' di Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy; 3 TNO, Zeist, The Netherlands Background: Due to the imminent growth of the world population, shortage of protein sources for human consumption will arise in the near future. Alternative and sustainable protein sources (e.g. insects and algae) are now being explored for the production of food and feed. Mealworm (Tenebrio molitor) as a new protein source is of great interest since less energy and agricultural land is needed for the production and less greenhouse gasses are produced. Previously the allergenicity of mealworm proteins was assessed using imunnoblot and indirect Basophil activation test (BAT) (*Verhoeckx et al.). The results indicated a cross reactivity with house dust mite (HDM) and crustaceans, two common causes of allergy. In this study the effect of processing on the allergenicity of mealworm proteins was investigated. Methods: Different mealworm extracts (in tris, urea and SDS/DTT buffer) were prepared from raw, blanched, boiled, baked and fried mealworms. The protein patterns were identified using SDS page and liquid chromatography coupled to mass spec-trometry (LC-MS). The allergenicity was assessed using direct BAT and immunoblots with serum from patients with a food allergy to crustaceans and an inhalant allergy to HDM or sensitised to mealworm proteins. Furthermore, skin prick tests (SPT) prepared from the different processed mealworms were tested on the same patients. Results: The SDS page gels showed a clear difference in protein patterns between the processed and non-processed mealworm extracts. Processing had a clear effect on the solubility of the proteins, but no significant effect was observed on the allergenicity of the extracts in immunoblot, BAT or SPT. Introduction: The incidence of food allergy is increasing during the last two decades and affecting about 8% of young children and about 3% of adults. Gut bacteria play an important role in induction of oral immune tolerance to food components and in prevention of food allergies. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of two selected clones of gut probiotic bacteria (Lactobacillus sp.) on an allergic sensitisation in a germ-free mouse model of food allergy. Methods: Two Lactobacillus clones with divergent immunomodulating properties were selected according in vitro testing of various clones of Lactobacillus species. Germ-free BALB/c mice were colonised with these two selected bacterial clones. Then, conventional and colonised mice were sensitised intraperitoneally and challenged intragastrically with ovalbumin antigen. Physiological symptoms (temperature, weight and allergic diarrhea) were observed during mice challenging. Levels of allergen specific serum antibodies were determined by ELISA (IgA, IgG1 and IgG2a) or by beta-hexosaminidase release test (IgE). Mast cell protease-1 (MMCP-1) were determined in sera and cytokine production in supernatants after mesenterial and spleen cells cultivation were determined by ELISA. Changes in induction of regulatory T cells, activities of brush-border hydrolases in jejunum and ileum, and levels of histamine in mice excrement were also determined. Results: We observed that the colonisation with two selected bacterial clones (Lactobacillus sp.) with divergent immunomodulating properties had a different effect on the allergic sensitisation and also differed from the conventional mice. Conclusion: This mouse model of food allergy allows us to understand immune mechanisms by which various clones of probiotic bacteria influence allergic sensitisation in the gut. Background: Induction of oral tolerance (IOT) is a therapeutic alternative in those patients with food allergy as cow 0 s milk protein (CMP) or egg allergy. However, it remains still unknown whether long-term complications may occur as a result of such treatment. We describe seven cases of eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases observed during IOT performance. Method: We evaluated 75 patients on whom we administered IOT treatment to CMP and 24 patients to egg according to our protocol. We did a clinical follow-up at 6 months and then annually, asking specifically about digestive symptoms. Background: Respiratory epithelial cells play an important role in defense mechanisms of the lung by releasing chemokines responsible for recruitment of immune cells. Their receptor structures are able to recognise different signals from the environment and in the case of injury respond immediately by upregulation of proinflammatory genes. IL-1 related cytokines share similarities in their receptor distribution and signaling pathways, however, overlapping actions of these cytokines have not been clearly demonstrated. The aim of our study was to compare the capacity of different IL-1 related cytokines to stimulate the production and release of multiple CC and CXC chemokines by epithelial cells. Method: The chemokine gene expression has been studied using an cDNA array system in human alveolar type-II like cells A549 stimulated by IL-1 beta, IL-18, and IL-33. The chemokine levels in culture supernatants were measured using multiplex immunoluminometric assay (Luminex technology) or by ELISA. Results: In repetitive experiments, epithelial cells constitutively expressed mRNA for CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL3, CXCL5, CXCL6, and CXCL8. Stimulation with 50 ng/ml of IL-1beta for 24 h resulted in upregulation of 17 chemokine genes with the biggest increase in mRNA density being found in CCL2 (MCP-1), CCL18 (DC-CK1), CCL24 (eotaxin-2), CXCL3 (GROalpha), CXCL5 (ENA-78), CXCL8 (IL-8), and CXCL11 (I-TAC) genes. In two chemokine genes, CCL26 (eotaxin-3) and CXCL16 (SR-PSOX), slight downregulation of mRNA density was detected upon IL-1beta stimulation. Stimulation of A549 cells with 50 ng/ml of IL-18 slightly upregulated the expression of CCL1 (I-309), CCL5 (RAN-TES) and CCL15 (HCC2) while IL-33 stimulation resulted in moderate increase of mRNA density in chemokines CCL1 (I-309), CCL11 (eotaxin), CXCL11 (I-TAC), and XCL2 (SCM-1beta) as compared to unstimulated cells. Conclusion: We conclude from our data that individual members of IL-1 family, although related in a molecular structure and signalling pathways, widely differ in the capacity to stimulate epithelial production of both CXC and CC chemokines. Supported HAE 1 & 2) and complement C4 (in both) is the hallmark of Hereditary Angioedema. HAE 2 Mutational analysis can help if C1INH deficiency likely but serology uncertain. We present three patients from the same family with an identical 'HAE 2' mutation whose serology was aytpical and more like HAE 1. Many authorities state that both C1inh and C4 level are required for diagnosis, but even that can be misleading. Methods: A 22 year-old lady presenting with a new diagnosis of symptomatic HAE had marginally reduced C1INH and C1INHF with low C4 when well. Her father and 1 of 2 brothers also had angioedema. One of our existing HAE type 1 patients was her paternal great uncle. Serial C1INH, C1INHF in her father and great uncle were similarly unremarkable when they were between attacks, irrespective of treatment. C1INH was neither as high as in typical HAE 2 nor as low as in typical HAE 1 and could not reliably be stated to be diagnostic of either. Genotyping was therefore performed. Results: Three family members (index case, father and paternal great uncle) had a heterozygous 0 S438P/p.Ser460 Pro exchange 0 mutation previously associated with HAE type 2 yet were serologically unremarkable or Type 1. Only C1INHF and C4 changes during an attack reliably differentiated affected individuals. Conclusion: This mutation has previously been reported with a HAE 2 serological picture although the serology is not available to confirm this. Nevertheless serological diagnosis of HAE can be more uncertain than is generally recognised as this type 1 family often had atypical patterns. Individuals with suspected HAE should be managed in Specialist Centres. Potentially some HAE cases may be hidden in serologically 'unremarkable' patients, or misclassified if changes in C4 are not checked in an attack. Background: Bacterial infections support atherogenesis through the development of chronic inflammatory condition. The influence of bacterial TLR agonists on endothelial barrier functions and modulation of cytokine profile of dendritic cells (DCs) is unknown. The aim of the study was to analyze the effect of LPS and CpG on endothelial barrier functions and tight junctions, and IL-10 expression in DCs exposed to ApoB100. Method: HUVEC were induced with LPS, CpG ODN and 7-ketocholesterol (7 kCH) for 48 h in Real-time Cell Electric Impedance Sensing system to analyze barrier functions based on electrical impedance (CI) measurements, and for 24 h to assess tight junctions proteins (occludin, ZO-1) and VE-cadherin mRNA expression in real-time pcr, and apoptosis in FACS. DCs were driven from monocytes magnetically isolated from human PBMCs, pre-incubated with LPS or CpG for 48 h and subsequently induced with ApoB100 for another 24 h to analyze IL-10 mRNA expression in real-time pcr. Results: In HUVEC, LPS caused 32% decrease of CI and 25% decrease of ZO-1 mRNA expression. CpG ODN caused 35% decrease of CI, 42% decrease of occludin and 31% decrease of ZO-1 mRNA expression. 7-kCH increased HUVEC apoptosis, caused 80% decrease of CI, 20% decrease of ZO-1 and 77% decrease of VE-cadherin, but 2-fold enhancement of occludin mRNA expression. In DCs, ApoB100 caused 55% decrease of IL-10 mRNA expression. LPS decreased IL-10 mRNA expression to 0.005%. Pre-incubation of DCs with LPS and subsequent induction with ApoB100 caused further 2fold decrease of IL-10 mRNA expression. Levels of anti-ET-IgM (0.19 AE 0.034 g/l) in SLE patients were significantly (39.7%; P = 0.05) less than in the control group but levels of anti-ET-IgG (0.744 AE 0.09 g/l,) were 2-fold greater than in the control group (p H < 0.01). Conclusion: Reduction of specific receptors to ET on monocytes and granulocytes demonstrates a persistent influence of ET while reduction of anti-endotoxin IgM with parallel increase in anti-endotoxin IgG indicates chronic activation of anti-endotoxin immunity in SLE patients. in healthy controls being 0.6635 AE 0.04706 CUOD (P < 0.001). SIgA levels and anti -ET-sIgA were significantly (P < 0.001) greater in AS patients compared with the control group being 105.5 mg/l (QI -57.9, QIII -158.2) and 0.217 (QI -0.155, QIII -0.336) CUOD. Conclusion: There is an imbalance of systemic and mucosal anti-endotoxin humoral immunity in AS patients which may influence the pathogenesis of this inflammatory disease. Functional condition of ejaculated sperm from infertile patients with chronic bacterial and abacterial prostatitis assessed by CD95 expression analysis Background: Cytokines and immune responses are intrinsically involved in reproductive physiology. Local or systemic disturbances of these factors due to inflammation or infection negatively affects fertility. Methods: CD95 positive ejaculated sperm were quantified and concentrations of TNF-a, IL-6, IL-8 and TGF-b1 were assessed in semen samples of patients with infertility including 32 patients with chronic abacterial prostatitis, 20 patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis and 10 healthy control men. Spearman rank correlation analysis was performed to assess inter-relations between of CD95 positive ejaculated sperm as well as cytokines in the seminal plasma. Results: Chronic abacterial and bacterial inflammation of the prostatic gland was accompanied by increased CD95 positive ejaculated sperm (P < 0.05) with no significant difference between patients with chronic abacterial prostatitis and chronic bacterial prostatitis. Twent-four h after ejaculation the number of CD95 positive sperm in patients with chronic abacterial prostatitis increases (P < 0.05), but in patients with chronic bacterial prostatitis remains constant (P > 0.05). The number of CD95 positive sperm correlates with TGF-b1 but not with the number of leukocytes, or the levels of TNF-a, IL-6 or IL-8. Conclusions: Increased production of TGF-b1 which is released into semen ejaculate during prostate inflammation is correlated with increasing amounts of CD95 positive sperm in patients with chronic abacterial prostatitis. Background: The most effective way for influenza disease control is specific immunisation. This study compares immunogenicity of two inactivated influenza vaccines Fluvaxin and Vaxigrip used for immunisation of adults in Minsk, Belarus. Methods: This study assessed 157 people, of whom 81 had been vaccinated with Fluvaxin (Group 1), vs 76 vaccinated with Vaxigrip (Group 2). All participants had blood sampled before vaccination, and again 28 AE 7 days after vaccination. Specific antibodies determined by haemagglutinin using sera in HAI were determined employing WHO approved methods. Immunogenicity assessment was conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products (CPMP). Results: In Group 1 persons with protective antibody titers after immunisation significantly increased from 29.6% to 65.4% for influenza virus H1N1, from 19.8% to 61.7% for influenza A virus/H3N2, and from 22.2% to 58% for influenza B viruses (P < 0.05). Levels of sero-conversion for all three antigenic components of the vaccine in the vaccinated group met CPMP criteria. In Group2, protective antibody titers after vaccination also significantly increased from 5.3% to 51.3% for influenza virus H1N1, from 3.9% to 23.7% for influenza virus A/H3N2, and from 15.8% to 71.1% for influenza B viruses (P < 0.05). However, a seroconversion increase of less than 40% occurred for H1N1 and influenza B. Immunisation increased the geometric mean antibodies titers to all three components of the vaccines most notably for influenza virus H1N1. Conclusion: Used as prevention of influenza in adults Minsk, the inactivated vaccines Fluvaxin and Vaxigrip both demonstrated immunogenicity but differed in the magnitude of the antibody titers induced towards specific influenza types. These findings may impact vaccine utilisation as prophylaxis for specific types of anticipated influenza epidemics. Background: Histamine is a key immunoregulatory mediator in both immediate type hypersensitivity reactions and chronic inflammatory responses. Toll-like receptors (TLR) recognise bacterial ligands and histamine alters TLR signaling cascades, in particular via histamine receptor 2 (H2R). However, the influence of histamine on TLR responses in cells from inflamed patients has been poorly described. Method: Forty seven patients diagnosed with IBD (24 with Crohn's disease and 23 with ulcerative colitis) and 24 healthy volunteers were included in the study. Expression of histamine receptors (H1, H2, H4R), histamine-related enzymes (HDC, HNMT and DAO) as well as TLR-1, TLR-2, TLR-4, TLR-5 and TLR-9 was investigated using REAL-TIME PCR. Cytokine levels were determined in culture supernatants after 24-h Pam 3 -Cys (TLR-2 ligand) stimulation in the presence or absence of histamine or famotidine (H2R antagonist). T cell, B cell and monocyte expression of histamine receptors was evaluated by flow cytometry. Results: Significant differences in H1R, H4R, TLR-6, TLR-9 and DAO gene expression were observed in patients with IBD compared to healthy volunteers. Although TLR-2 and H2R gene expression was similar for healthy volunteers and IBD patients, cytokine responses were significantly different. Histamine altered TLR-2induced IL-12, TNF-a, G-CSF, IFN-g, MCP-1, IL-1b, IL-6 and GM-CSF secretion from healthy volunteers, while similar histamine effects on TLR-2-induced cytokine responses in IBD patients was only observed for TNF-a and G-CSF. Histamine mediated these effects primarily through the H2R as famotidine negated the differential response. The percentage of H2R+ monocytes was significantly reduced for IBD patients, compared to healthy volunteers. Conclusion: Patients with IBD display dysregulated expression of TLRs and histamine receptors. The anti-inflammatory influence of H2R signaling on TLR-2 innate immune response is abrogated in IBD patients, suggesting that deliberate manipulation of H2R-signalling may provide beneficial effects to patients with IBD. The role of neurotrophin in a murine model of house dust mite induced allergic rhinitis Background: Allergic rhinitis (AR) is an airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR) and mucosal inflammation disease mediated by IgE-associated processes that is characterised by sneezing, nasal congestion, and rhinorrhea. The imbalance of Th1/Th2 immune response is considered to contribute to allergic diseases, however the interval between inflammation and AHR remains unclear. Growing information illustrated that nerve growth factor (NGF), a neurotrophin, plays an important role in neuroimmune interactions by augmenting an existing Th2 immune response. Method: Since probiotics and biocompatible water-soluble chitosan (WSC) have been demonstrated to have anti-inflammatory properties that could inhibit the development of allergic Th2 response, we aim to assess the effect of WSC and probiotic extracts on NGF in Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Der p)-induced AR murine model. Results: Intranasal administration of both WSC and probiotic extracts attenuated AHR in Der p-challenged mice due to a lower respiratory resistance and improved the nasal congestion by manifestation higher respirator rate than non-treated mice. Under management of both WSC and probiotic extracts, the thickness of nasal respiratory epithelium was reduced in microscopy. Both of WSC and probiotic extracts treatment moderated allergic inflammation including a decreased level of total and Der p-specific IgE in the serum, lowered expressions of IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 in nasal lavage fluid, as well as less eosinphil infiltration in the nasal cavity. In particular, therapeutics with both treatments reduced NGF performance in nasal lavage fluid along with its receptors, p75NTR and TrkA, in the respiratory epithelium of nasal mucosa in Der p-stimulated mice. Conclusion: We suggested that the reduced NGF and its receptor levels may correspond to a decrease in AHR and mucosa inflammation by both WSC and probiotic extracts treatment. Background: Delivery of intramuscular adrenaline with an epinephrine autoinjector (EAI) is first line emergency treatment for anaphylaxis, but failure to administer the drug promptly and effectively could prove fatal. Therefore patients must have sufficient knowledge about anaphylaxis and in the correct use of their EAI device. We assessed the knowledge of patients with known anaphylaxis about their condition and EAI technique. Method: Patients diagnosed with anaphylaxis were identified from hospital records and invited to complete a written anaphylaxis questionnaire and a practical demonstration using a training EAI. Results: Twenty-eight patients took part in the study. Only one completed all of the EAI demonstration correctly. Four patients admitted they did not know how to use an EAI. None of the 28 patients scored 100% on the questionnaire. Common errors included 86% not able to recognise signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis, 36% not aware of biphasic reactions, 32% not knowing how to store the EAI, 14% not aware of the need for secondary care and 43% not aware how to check if the EAI had been used successfully. Conclusion: Ninety-six percent of our patients could not demonstrate correct use of their EAI and there were significant and serious gaps in their knowledge. This is likely to impair their ability to manage their life threatening condition successfully. We recommend developing anaphylaxis education programmes and action plans. This would involve education about anaphylaxis, allergen avoidance, signs, symptoms and management of anaphylaxis and practical training in the use of an EAI with the widely available training devices. There is also a role for internet based training applications to educate patient groups who do not actively interact with secondary care services. Background: Training and education is essential to provide patients the skills to manage their disease and improve outcomes. This education requires constant repetition and reinforcement. There is evidence that education is effective in improving the outcome in chronic disease. The ultimate goal is to reduce morbidity, improve functionality, and quality of life. Method: We programmed a training workshop on allergic diseases and invited parents, caregivers and children with conditions such as asthma, rhinitis and atopic dermatitis seen at Hospital Infantil de Mexico Federico Gomez. Multiple choice questionnaire that consisted of 15 questions about allergic disease was performed, the questionnaire was applied to the main caregiver before and after the workshop. A year later, the same patients and relatives were invited to participate and they were answered the same questionnaire in order to assess whether the knowledge remained over time or if necessary repetition and continuous reinforcement is needed. Results: We performed the questionnaire to a total of 107 families (mothers, fathers and caregivers) of children with any allergic disease. 17.6% of parents reported that their child had a diagnosis of rhinitis, asthma 23.1, 0.9% 0.9% food allergy and atopic dermatitis 42.6% reported more than one of these diseases. The mean number of correct responses on the first questionnaire was 7.14 while in the postworkshop questionnaire was 10.6. Of the 107 tested parents 89 answered over 50% of post-training questions properly. During the first examination it was found that 15% of households had less than 26% of questions correct, while in the post-workshop questionnaire only one family had that many correct answers. The best results were found immediately after the training, 1 year after the questionnaires results revealed the need for strengthening the teaching techniques. Conclusion: Continuous education is essential for the proper monitoring and training of patients with allergic disease. Its also important to take into account ethnic and cultural characteristics of our target group to improve understanding. Background: Adrenaline is the first-line emergency treatment for anaphylaxis. Early intramuscular (IM) administration can reduce the risk of hospitalisation and death in individuals at significant risk of anaphylaxis. The only adrenaline autoinjector available in Portugal is Anapen â . The aim of this study was to evaluate Background: EAACI and WAO recommended in the last decade the adoption of a global nomenclature for allergy. Although allergy specialists embraced the proposed terminology, this is not yet adequately coded in the International Coding of Diseases, and moreover it is not properly presented in many lexicography resources, important tools not only for the preservation, but also for the development of languages. Method: In order to estimate the correct or erroneous aspects in the definition of allergy, different Romanian language dictionaries and lexicons were evaluated, and allergy was assessed for the revised definition as a hypersensitivity reaction initiated by immunological mechanisms. Results: The Romanian lexicographic assessment included four revised, enlarged editions of explanatory dictionaries, two dictionaries of neologisms, one of synonyms, an online explanatory dictionary database and medical dictionary. In all explanatory and neologisms dictionaries, allergy is defined as a modified reaction, not induced by an allergen or antigen, but erroneously induced only by microbes, mechanical or chemical agents. The term hypersensitivity is not included in the definition. The evaluated dictionary of synonyms, also wrongly considers that allergy is synonymous with anaphylaxis, rash and exanthema. In the medical dictionary, the new aspect of hypersensitivity reaction is mentioned in the definition, while in the online explanatory dictionary database, due to personal volunteer contribution, the correct non-lexicographic definition of allergy was added according to revised EAACI nomenclature. Conclusion: The term allergy is often misused by general public to describe any adverse reactions to different agents, and this may be due also to outdated definitions from different language dictionaries. In the educational process to increase awareness about allergy, the accurate definition of the medical term is essential, and involvement of lexicographers may be also important. Kö se, S ß ; T€ urken, M; G€ ol Serin, B; Akkoc ßlu, G; Ersan, G Tepecik Education and Research Hospital, Izmir, Turkey Background: Allergic diseases are chronic disorders that have an increasingly elevating incidence in all communities and affect quality of life of the patients. This research has been planned descriptively to assess the quality of life of patients who were diagnosed of allergic diseases. Method: The sampling of the research comprised of 150 patients who referred to Immunology Clinic of Tepecik Education and Reserch Hospital in 2013 and were diagnosed of allergic rhinitis, asthma and urticare. Data were collected by a questionnaire involving the sociodemographic characteristics of individuals and the SF-36 Quality of Life Scale was developed by the researchers. Questionnaires were completed by researchers by using face-to-face interview method. Results: One hundred and fifty patients with allergic semptoms were questionned. Of these patients 20% (n:30) were allergic rhinitis, 60% (n:90) were urticare and 20% (n:30) were asthma. 48% (n:72) patiens were female and mean age was 30. _ It is reported that in patients with allergic semptoms, the score of the physical activity scale was higher compared to the score of the emotional and fatigued scale. Conclusion: It was determined that feeling fatigued and exhausted due to allergic rhinitis did affect patients' quality of life (vitality) and they did not experience any problems concerning their physical functions. Objective: To evaluate the features of the patients consulted to our allergy clinic and to interpret about the effectiveness of these consultations. Methods: Patients referred to our clinic with written consultation form between November 2011 and October 2012 were included in the study. We are working in a chest diseases research and education hospital and the pulmonologists are referring patients to our clinic. In May 2013, four pulmonologist evaluated these written consultation notes. They commented on the intelligibility of the aim of consultation (question 1), the efficacy of the note written by allergy clinic (question 2) and whether the patients benefits from the consultation (question 3). They score these three points according to a ten point scale. Results: Two hundred and Ninety-two consultation forms were evaluated. Nearly half of the (49.7%) patients were consulted with a diagnosis, the other half was consulted for a symptom. The most consulted symptoms were skin lesions and lower respiratory system symptoms. The most consulted diagnosis were drug allergy and asthma. The most frequent final diagnosis were drug allergy and asthma. Allergic diseases were not considered as a diagnose in a significant portion of patients (15.4%). The pulmonologists gave full 10 point for question three in 65.4-84.6% of the patients. The mean score for question 1 was lower than other questions (8.44 AE 2.0 vs 9.47 AE 1.20 and 9.06 AE 1.98 P < 0.01 for both). On the basis of final diagnosis, drug allergy patients' consultations were found to have more appropriate response (9.77 AE 1.19 vs 9.19 AE 1.48 P < 0.01) and found to be more effective (9.50 AE 1.25 vs 8.50 AE 2.53 P < 0.01). Although the score for question1 were lower in asthma patients compared to other diagnosis, the score for appropriate response and efficacy were similar. Conclusion: Drug allergy and asthma patients were referred to an allergy clinic in a chest diseases hospital. The consultations were mostly found to be effective according to pulmonologists' justice. There are some differences for the scores in terms of diagnosis. These results can give important clues while organizing the allergy clinics daily practice. The impact of peer learning and assessment practice on post-graduate studies and development of allergology and clinical immunology specialists Background: Growing prevalence of allergic diseases present a significant challenge for health care systems around the world. A good progress was achieved in the research of immunology and allergology, but the implementation of new scientific findings in medical practice is often delayed, as many countries do not have efficient specialist education and training, particularly in primary care. Such knowledge transfer can be assisted by modern education technologies and innovative pedagogy. Research objectives of this project were to investigate the impact of peer learning/assessment pedagogy on postgraduate (PG) students, specifically: 1 course content understanding; 2 critical thinking and communication skills development; 3 academic performance. Method: Two randomized parallel PG groups, including clinicians and health care managers, were compared: 1 on a course which included four new peer learning/assessment tasks (case studies), 2 control group of a similar size (traditional version of the course). Pre-and post-course test were evaluated, in combination with questionnaires, collect from group 1 (43 valid questionnaires) for detailed feedback on their 'student' and 'instructor' roles. Results: Both groups demonstrated similar performance in pre-tests, but post-test mean mark was 15% higher in group 1. Students' feedback indicted challenging, but educational nature of peer learning, which led to a higher interaction within the study group, a better understanding of specialist content and test requirements, which was mostly achieved within an 'instructor' role. Conclusion: Peer learning develops student's communication and critical thinking skills, allows better understanding of course content, increases their performance and can be widely used in PG allergy education, training and specialisation. Use of social media for information needs in families of children with allergies Gardner, J; Maity, S Child Health, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom Background: There are now over 1 billion users of social media worldwide. Social media are primarily internet and mobile based tools for sharing and discussing information amongst human beings. They are activities that integrate technology, telecommunications and social interaction (e.g., Twitter, Facebook, YouTube). In 2010 social media accounted for 11% of all of the UK's internet usage (1) . The total time spent on social media in the US increased 37% to 121 billion minutes in July 2012, compared to 88 billion in July 2011. Aim is to find the information needs of families with children with allergy and use of social media for allergy information. Method: We performed a ten question survey of patients within a tertiary paediatric allergy clinic, parents attending an allergy support group and via an online allergy forum. Results: Ninty-eight percent of people use some form of social media and 77% of those had used social media to find allergy information. A variety of websites were used and mostly on a daily basis. The majority of patients wanted to see more information on allergy and from their own clinics. Twitter and Facebook came out as the preferred methods. Allergic disease charities had been accessed by 60% of people interviewed however only 20% used their own clinics website. Conclusion: Social media is part of everyones lives and it is important that allergy services embrace in order to fulfil the information needs of the children and families attending their clinics. daily PM PEF and change from baseline in trough FEV 1 over the 12-week treatment period, change from baseline in the percentage of symptom-free 24-h periods and change from baseline in the percentage of rescue-free 24-h periods during the 12-week treatment period. The study will also use the Patient Satisfaction and Preference Questionnaire (PASAPQ) to assess device satisfaction, performance and convenience, device preference, and willingness to continue device use. Safety will be assessed throughout the study by evaluating AEs, oropharynx examination results, physical examination results and vital signs. EudraCT number: 2009-014498-42. Passive smoking avoidance behaviors and asthma in junior high school students Suzuki, S; Sato, K; Oda, Y; Watanabe, H Pediatrics, Shimoshizu National Hospital, Yotsukaido, Japan Background: Passive smoking avoidance is crucial in asthma management but is often difficult to achieve especially if household members smoke. Method: We asked seven to ninth students in five junior high schools about history of asthma diagnosis and treatment during the past year by ISAAC questionnaire, passive smoking avoidance behavior by three items of 4-choice multiple question, and numbers of smokers in household members. Results: Of 1992 students (85% of all students) who answered appropriately, 396 students had a history of asthma and 102 students had asthma treatment during the past year. There were not significant associations between the number of smokers in household members and history of asthma diagnosis and treatment. In the group who had not asthma diagnosis (n = 1596), the number of smokers in household members was significantly negatively associated with behaviors of avoiding tobacco smell, selecting smoke-free eating places and restaurants, and avoiding smoking people. In the group who had asthma diagnosis but had not treatment during the past year, all avoidance behaviors were similar in the students who have no household smokers (n = 139) and those who have one smoker (n = 101), and all behaviors in each group were significantly more appropriate than those who have two or more smokers (n = 54). In contrast, in the group who had asthma treatment during the past year, all avoidance behaviors were statistically the most appropriate in the students without household smokers (n = 48), and the behaviors in the students with one smoker (n = 36) and those with two or more smokers (n = 18) were similarly less appropriate. Conclusions: Passive smoking avoidance behaviors in junior high school students were dependent on the number of smokers in their household members but were different according to asthma control. These results may have important implications for asthma management in adolescents. Background: Omalizumab is a humanized monoclonal anti-immunglobulin E (IgE) antibody for the treatment ofuncontrolled severe persistent asthma despite optimal theraphy. Method: We aimed to evaluate the effect of omalizumab on asthma control, asthma exacerbation, hospitalisation due to asthma and its safety and tolerability in real-life conditions. Retrospective cohort study, 47 adult patients with uncontrolled severe persistent asthma on omalizumab treatment ≥2 years were included. The short (at 16 week) and long-term (at 1, 2, 3, and 4 years) effects of omalizumab were assessed through the Asthma Control Test (ACT). Other secondary outcomes like exacerbation and hospitalisation were evaluated. Results: Mean age was 42.7 AE 10.2 years. 74.5% of patient (n = 35) were female. Fourty-four patients was under treatment of omalizumab treatment. Mean follow up time was 46.8 AE 11.8 months (26-66 month). A significant improvement in ACT score (at 16 week, P < 0.002; at 1 year, P < 0.001; at 2 year, P < 0.001; at 3 year, P < 0.001; and 4 year, P < 0.003) and in almost all of the five individual questions. Regarding asthma exacerbation and hospitalisation due to asthma, we verified a significant decrease in exacerbation (at 1 year, P < 0.0012; at 2 year, P < 0.001; at 3 year, P < 0.003; and 4 year, P = 0.01) and hospitalisation (at 1 year, P < 0.001; at 2 year, P < 0.001; at 3 year, P = 0.005; and 4 year, P = 0.02). There was a significant decrease in daily inhaled steroid dose. There was no significant change in lung function. According to adverse effects, headache was seen in 8.5% (n = 4), local effects was seen in 23.4% (n = 11), and myalgia was seen in 6.3% (n = 3) patients. Anaphylaxis was not obseved in any patient. Conclusion: Omalizumab promoted a global benefit on asthma control. It also yielded a reduction in asthma exacerbations and hospitalisation due to asthma, and a steroid-sparing effect. Omalizumab was found to be generally safe and welltolerated. Development and validation of asthma questionnaire for the best control in preschool-aged children Background: Japanese pediatric asthma guideline (JPGL) aim at the best control. Although some questionnaire to assess asthma control for children have been developed, these were not suitable for this purpose. We developed a standardised, caregiver-completed, and validated tool for assessing asthma control in young children, the JPGL based Asthma Control test for Kids (JACK). Method: A cross-sectional, nonrandomized study was conducted. Participants were caregivers of children younger than 6 years who had a diagnosis of asthma or a history of three or more episodes of asthmalike respiratory symptoms. The 34-item working questionnaire contains about asthma control was used. Best items to determine asthma control based on JPGL was selected by stepwise logistic regression methods in two-third of participants. Validation and reliability was tested in remain one-third. Results: Six items was selected for JACK. Five questions were about frequency of wheezing with cold, sleep disturbance related asthma, severity of wheezing or cough and degree of exercise induced asthma in the past 4 weeks. Last item was hospitalisation with asthma in the past 1 year. Reliability was greater than 0.7. Sensitivity and specificity were 0.83 and 0.83 to distinguish uncontrolled asthma, 0.79 and 0.80 to select totally controlled asthma, respectively. Akaike Information Criterion was 291.5. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (95%CI) was 0.89 (0.85-0.92). Jack score differed significantly with Kruskal-Wallis test in the both samples for three levels of control based JPGL, severity of asthma and change in therapy. Conclusion: JACK is simple, valid, parentcompleted questionnaire that can be used in the screening of uncontrolled asthma for pre-school aged children also available to identified totally controlled children. It can be relevant instrument aiming the best control next for the achievement of well control and prevention of the over-treatment. Low dose inhaled steroid compared to leukotriene antagonist in children with mild persistent asthma Abdallah, AM Assiut, Pediatric, Assiut, Egypt Background: Bronchial asthma is a chronic lung disease characterised by reversible airway obstruction, inflammation, and bronchial hyperresponsiveness. The leukotrienes, mediate central components of asthmatic airway inflammation such as bronchospasm, mucus production, eosinophil recruitment. Preliminary data with leukotriene antagonists LTAS suggested that they show some beneficial effects in asthmatic children. Patients and methods: This study included 70 children with persistent bronchial asthma (48 males and 22 females) with age ranging from 5 to 14 years attending to the outpatient clinic and emergency unit of pediatric department, Assiut University Hospitals, during the period from January (2004) to January (2005) . As well as 20 apparently healthy children with matchable age and sex as controls. Besides meticulous history and thorough clinical examination, all cases and controls were subjected to the following investigations: Urinary LE4, serum IL-5, CBC including (AEC) and PFTS: included PEFR and FEV1. As regard therapy, patients were divided into two subgroups (35 patients each), one of them received LTAS (montelukast) and the other one received ICS (fluticasone) for 1 month duration. The clinical and laboratory assessment were done on admission and after 1 month of treatment. Results: On admission patients (both groups) showed significantly higher values of AEC, uLE4 and serum IL-5 and significantly lower values regarding PFTS (PEFR& FEV1) compared to controls. After 1 month of treatment patients in both groups showed significantly lower values of (AEC, LE4 and IL-5) and significantly higher values of PEFR and FEV1 than before starting treatments. No significant differences were found between both groups of patients regarding all previous parameters before and after treatments. Conclusion: LTA Scan be used as a monotherapy in patients with mild persistent asthma as alternative to ICS with similar efficacy, better compliance and less side effects. Background: The role of adaptive immune system in regulation of asthmatic responses remains elusive. Here we performed a comprehensive time-course analysis of mutual relationships between development of asthmatic response following allergen challenge and changes in several CD4+ T-cell subsets. Method: We characterised CD4+ T-cell subsets as either releasing interleukin-10 (CD4+CD25ÀCD127À and CD4+CD25+ CD127+ T-cells) or responding to IL-10 (CD4+ T-cell subsets expressing CD210). Patients that developed asthmatic reaction were described as responders (R) whereas the others were named nonresponders (NR). Results: In R, in contrast to NR, at 6 h we demonstrated significant expansion of CD4+CD25-CD127-T-cells which was followed by drop to baseline values at 24 h. In contrast, in R we observed decrease in numbers of CD4+CD25+CD127+ and CD4+CD25-CD127+ T-cells at 24 h. Interestingly, at baseline, despite comparable IL-10 levels, R presented with lower levels of all CD4+ T-cell subsets expressing CD210. In R, numbers of CD4+CD210+ T-cell subsets were further decreased following bronchial challenge which was paralleled by decrease in IL-10 serum levels. Conclusion: Altogether our data suggest that dynamic interactions between IL-10 producing and IL-10-responding CD4+ Tcells could contribute to pathogenesis of asthmatic responses in atopic individuals. Background: Helper T (Th) cells have been implicated in asthma. To investigate a role of Th cells in airflow limitation, T celltransfer model was analyzed for immediate and late phase asthmatic responses after antigen challenge. Method: Ovalbumin (OVA) specific Th clones were derived from either the regional lymphnodes of Balb/c mice immunised with OVA/CFA or splenocytes of DO11.10 transgenic mice expressing T cell receptor specific for OVA/H-2 d . Th clones were adoptively transferred into unprimed mice. After intranasal or inhalation challenge with OVA, airway resistance was continuously monitored by either unrestrained whole body plethysmography (BUXCO) or resistance/compliance analyzer under anesthetized condition. Bronchoalveolar lavage and analysis of airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) were performed 48 h after OVA challenge. Supernatants of stimulated Th clones were analyzed for contractile activity using collagen gels embedded with murine primary bronchial smooth muscle cells (BSMCs). Results: When unprimed mice were transferred with Th clones, T5-1, T6-2, T6-4, and T6-7, Penh values were significantly increased 6 h after OVA challenge. In contrast, mice transferred with other Th clones, BF7, T6-1, or T6-10 did not show any change. Airflow limitation was confirmed by a direct measurement of airway resistance under anesthetized, restrained, and intubated conditions. The airflow limitation was also induced by the challenge with T cell epitope peptide, OVA 323-339 . Contractile activity of BSMCs was detectable in the supernatants of T6-2 stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3. Conclusion: Activation of Th cells resulted in an airflow limitation besides eosinophilic inflammation, AHR, and mucous hyperplasia. T cell-derived bronchoconstrictor might be a target for therapy-resistant asthma. Tight junction protein claudin-5 in a murine model of asthma Background: The tight junction (TJ) protein, claudin 5 (CLDN5) is a critical regulator of TJ that control cellular polarity and pericellular permeability, and structural integrity of cellular networks. But its clinical significance and the molecular mechanisms underlying CLDN5 expression in bronchial asthma remain unclear. Objective: Here we undertaken for the role and signal mechanism of CLDN5 in allergic airway diseases. Methods: Using mice sensitised with ovalbumin (OVA) and challenged with OVA (OVA-OVA mice) as well as mice sensitised with OVA and challenged with saline (OVA-saline mice), we investigated the role of CLDN5 and to determine its molecular signaling activity in allergic airways. Results: In OVA-OVA mice, inflammatory cytokine levels, airway inflammation, and bronchial hyperresponsiveness were increased than in OVA-SAL mice. Lung CLDN5 transcript and protein using RT-PCR, immunohistochemical stain, and confocal microscopy were significantly changed in OVA-OVA mice than in OVA-SAL mice. The phosphorylation of FOXO1 and AKT were changed in OVA-OVA mice than in OVA-SAL mice. Conclusion: These results indicate that tight junction CLDN5 might be implicated in the pathogenesis of bronchial asthma in part through regulation of FOXO1 and AKT, and may be a novel therapeutic approach for asthma. Background: Increased proliferation of airway smooth muscle (ASM) cells is a key feature of airway remodelling in asthma. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a bioactive lipid and key regulator of cell trafficking, cell differentiation and immune responses. Increased concentrations of S1P have been detected in airways of asthmatic subjects and S1P has been shown to stimulate proliferation and contraction of human ASM cells. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of S1P in signalling and regulation of gene expression in ASM cells from healthy and asthmatic individuals. Method: Human ASM cells were grown from bronchial biopsies of healthy and asthmatic individuals. Affymetrix Human Exon 1.0 ST arrays, real-time PCR, and western blotting have been used to determine gene expression. Receptor signalling and function was determined by a range of selective agonists and antagonists, mRNA knockdown, and calcium mobilization assays. Results: S1P potently regulated the expression of more than 80 genes in human ASM cells including genes known to be involved in cell proliferation and airway remodelling. Intracellular calcium mobilization, extracellular signal-regulated and Rhoassociated kinases were required for S1P induced gene regulation. Three of the five known S1P receptors were expressed in human ASM cells at mRNA level; however, only S1P2 and S1P3 were required for S1P induced regulation of gene expression. Corticosteroids did not affect S1P induced changes and there was no significant difference between S1P induced responses from healthy and asthmatic subjects. Conclusion: This study shows that S1P is an important and steroid resistant activator of pro-remodelling pathways in human ASM cells. Targeting S1P or its receptors could be a novel treatment strategy for inhibiting airway remodelling in asthma. Background: Small airway involvement during induced bronchoconstriction reflects severity of asthma. Impulse oscillometry (IOS) has been proposed to measure both small and large airways, increased R5-20 being associated to small airway obstruction. Little is known about the small airway dysfunction during the hyperresponsiveness tests such as methacholine challenge (Mch), in 3-8 year old children with obstructive symptoms. Objective: We sought to evaluate if the children with severe EIB have impaired small airway function during the methacholine challenge. Methods: A total of 109 (95 with obstructive symptoms and 14 controls) children were studied to assess small airway function during the Mch challenge. The children were devided into three groups according to the result in exercise test. Group 1 had no EIB (Rrs5 increase <40%, n = 84), group 2 had a Rrs5 increase from 40 to 80% (moderate EIB, n = 13) and the group 3 had an increase over 80% (severe EIB, n = 12). The IOS resistance and reactance parameters R5, R20, R5-20, X5 and X10 were measured at baseline and after the Mch challenge. Results: At baseline R5-20 did not differ between the groups. After the Mch challenge the change in R5-20 was significantly higher in children with severe EIB (2.51 fold increase) compared to children with moderate EIB (1.62) or no EIB (1.96, P = 0.036). No significant differences were found in changes of R20, X5 or X10. The children in severe EIB group used also more short-acting beta-agonists during the last 2 months compared to the other two groups (P < 0.001). Conclusion: Small airway dysfunction measured by IOS during the Mch challenge and more frequent use of short-acting beta-agonists are associated with severe EIB in 3-8 year old children. Background: Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) has been implicated in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma. Elevated concentration of PAI-1 has been demonstrated in plasma and sputum of allergic asthma patients (APs). We evaluated in vitro the effect of Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Dp) allergens and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on secretion of PAI-1 by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of APs. Method: PBMCs from 15 mild-moderate APs and eight healthy controls (HCs) were cultured with Dp (2500 SBE/ml), LPS (10 ng/ml), or without any stimulation for up to 144 h (T 144 ). Concentration of PAI-1 in cell culture supernatants was evaluated using ELISA. Results: At T 144 the mean concentration of PAI-1 in APs (0.873 AE 0.59 ng/ml) did not significantly differ than that in HCs (0.484 AE 0.21 ng/ml; P = 0.049). Stimulation with Dp resulted in increase of PAI-1 concentration in APs (4.74 AE 3.7 ng/ml; P = 0.0012), but not in HCs (1.2 AE 1.15 ng/ml; P = 0.21). No significant effect of LPS stimulation on PAI-1 secretion in APs (0.94 AE 0.64 ng/ml; P = 0.26) or HCs (0.631 AE 0.31 ng/ml; P = 0.2) could be demonstrated. No significant effect of Dp stimulation on PAI-1 secretion was seen at T 6 or T 24 . Conclusion: Stimulation of PBMCs with Dp results in delayed increase in PAI-1 secretion. The increased secretion of PAI-1 associated with exposure to Dp may be implicated in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma. Background: Several papers show an increase in FENO (fraction of exhaled nitric oxide) after BAC (bronchial allergen challenge) or after a natural allergen exposure. Our earlier studies indicated that 72 h after BAC FENO was still increasing. Recent results have shown that the elevation lasts at least 2 weeks. The aim of the study was to compare the effects of BAC with pollens and mites on FENO for a period of 2 weeks. Method: Studies were performed on a group of 30 allergic subjects with history of sensitisation to mites (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Dermatophagoides farinae) n = 15 or pollens (grass pollen or birch pollen) n = 15. Before the BAC Pulmonary Function Test and FENO measurement were performed, and blood samples for sIgE evaluation were taken. BAC was performed according to modified Ryan 0 s method using Koko Digidoser (PDS-USA) both as a spirometer and a dosimeter. The deVilbiss 646 jet nebuliser connected to the dosimeter was used for the allergens nebulization. Commercial allergen extracts (Allergopharma) were used to the challenge. Serial FENO evaluations (16 timepoints -1st daybaseline and 8 h, and later once daily since 2nd to 14th day after BAC) were performed using Niox Mino both in clinic and in home. Results: All subjects with evidenced sensitisation to allergen used to BAC demonstrated a singnificant increase in FENO (independently of bronchoconstriction observed in first hours after BAC in some of them) starting from the second day after BAC and lasting until the end of the study. Background: Long-acting b2-adrenoreceptor agonists (LABAs) are used as controllers for treating asthma. Human myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) play a critical role in the pathogenesis of asthma. However, the effects of LABAs on human myeloid DCs (mDCs) and the detailed mechanisms are unknown. Methods: Circulating mDCs were isolated from six healthy subjects. The effects of LABAs, formoterol and salmeterol, on cytokine production, maturation and T cell stimulatory function of human mDCs were investigated. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)a and interleukin (IL)-10 were measured by ELISA. The expression of costimulatory molecules were investigated by flow cytometry. T cell stimulatory function was investigated by measuring interferon (IFN)-c and IL-13 production by T cells cocultured with formoterol-treated mDCs. Intracellular signaling was investigated by Western blot. Results: Formoterol and salmeterol induced IL-10, but suppressed TNF-a production in polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C)-stimulated mDCs. This effect was reversed by the b2-adrenoreceptor agonists (ICI118551). Forskolin, an adenyl cyclase activator, conferred a similar effect. Formoterol and salmeterol suppressed poly I:C-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) phospho-p38 and nuclear factor (NF)-jB-phospho-p65 expression. Formoterol and salmeterol inhibited maturation markers HLA-DR and CD80. Formoterol-treated mDCs inhibited IL-13 and IFN-c production by T cells. Conclusions: LABAs may induce tolerogenic function of human mDCs by enhancing IL-10, suppressing TNF-a, inhibiting maturation markers and suppressing T cell stimulatory ability. Background: Different indexes are used to define the positive response to exercise. The forced expiratory volume in 1-s (FEV1) is the most commonly used index of respiratory function in exercise challenge. Other parameters such as FEF 50 and PEFR are rarely used. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the response to exercise in children using different indexes of respiratory function (FEV1, FEF 50, and PEFR). Method: This study was performed at the Pediatric Allergy and Asthma Unit of Erciyes University in Kayseri, in Turkey. Children with asthma (n = 67) were included in this study. All children underwent a standart exercise challenge according to ATS guideline. A reduction in FEV1 of at least 10% of the preexercise value was considered positive. The values of spirometric FEV1, FEF 50, and PEFR were determined and compared. Results: Two groups of children were determined in the study: asthmatic children with positive (n = 46) and negative (n = 21) responses to exercise. The cut off values for the fall of FEF 50 and PEFR were found as ≥24.4%, and ≥15.6%, respectively. These values were correlated with FEV1 values (for FEF 50: r = 0.552, P = 0, for PEFR: r = 0.620, P = 0). In the exercise negative groups, the FEF 50 and PEFR values decreased more than the established cut off values in 4, and three patients, respectively. Conclusion: The criteria to define the normal airway response to exercise is not standard. FEF 50% and PEF % can decrease in response to exercise without changes in FEV1%. EIB should be defined by using more than one maximum expiratory flowvolume curve parameters (i.e, FEV1, FEF 50, and PEFR). Exhaled breath condensate Annexin A5 levels in exercise-induced bronchoconstriction in asthma: a preliminary study Background: The pathogenesis of exerciseinduced bronchoconstriction (EIB) in asthma is incompletely understood. The role of exhaled breath condensate (EBC) Annexin A5 which is an anti-inlamatory mediator, has not been investigated. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the EBC Annexin A5 levels in EIB in asthmatic children. Method: Two groups of children were enrolled in the study: asthmatic children with positive (n = 11) and negative (n = 7) responses to exercise. Levels of Annexin A5 were determined in EBC before and immediately after exercise challenge using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Results: We observed higher EBC Annexin A5 levels before exercise challenge in asthmatic children with negative responses to exercise than positive (P < 0.05). No significant difference was observed in the post exercise EBC Annexin A5 levels among the groups (P > 0.05). Also, no significant difference was observed between pre and post EBC Annexin A5 levels among the groups (P > 0.05). There was an inverse correlation between Annexin A5 levels and a reduction in forced expiratory volume at 1s percent (P = 0.009, r = À0.598). Conclusion: Our study showed that EBC Annexin A5 had preventive role in EIB in asthma. Annexin A5 and related compounds could provide novel therapeutic approaches to the treatment of EIB in asthma. Keywords: Exhaled breath condansate, exercise induced bronchoconstriction, Annexin A5, asthma Background: Measurement of serum IgE to peanut components can be clinically helpful and more accurate than IgE to whole peanut to predict peanut allergy. Different sensitisation patterns to peanut components have been documented in European regions, and not all studies have used prospective samples, multiple components and oral challenges. Currently, there are no data on this topic involving Italian children. Our aim was to determine the utility of peanut component-resolved diagnostics performed before oral peanut challenge and possible differences in peanut components recognition patterns in a population of Italian children with suspected peanut allergy. Methods: Thirty-two patients [median age 9 years, IQR 6.0-11.0 years] with reported history for peanut allergy and evidence of peanut sensitisation (skin prick test to peanut extract ≥3 mm) had serum analyzed for IgE to whole peanut and the recombinant allergen components Ara h 1, 2, 3, 8, and 9 with ImmunoCAP, and completed an open oral food challenge to peanut. Results: 12 (37.5%) children reacted on peanut challenge and were considered allergic. No differences were seen when comparing median values of IgE to peanut, Ara h 1, 3, 8 and 9, between allergic and tolerant children to peanut challenge. Noteworthy, 5 of 20 tolerant children had IgE to peanut >15 kUA/l (median, 23.5 kUA/l; IQR: 17.05-33.2 kUA/l) which is commonly considered a predictive value of peanut allergy. Conversely, a significant statistical difference was seen when comparing the median value of IgE to Ara h 2 in the two groups: 0.75 kUA/l (IQR: 0.22-4.34 kUA/l) in allergic children vs 0.1 kUA/l (IQR: 0.1-0.12 kUA/l) in tolerant ones (P < 0.001). Conclusion: IgE levels to Ara h 2 are significantly higher in children that react on oral peanut challenge. Our findings in Italian children are in line with recent reports and add confirmatory evidence that analysis of IgE to Ara h 2 could reduce the need for peanut challenge in suspected allergic patients. Background: Conglutin isoforms Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 are considered the most relevant peanut allergens, because they are frequently recognised by patient's serum, and highly potent in IgE-binding. This may be explained by the fact that Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 are highly resistant to digestion. The aim of this paper is to investigate the effect of digestion on the structure and IgE-binding of the different conglutin isoforms. Method: Purified conglutin isoforms Ara h 2.02, Ara h 2.01, and Ara h 6 were digested with immobilized trypsin. Digestion resistant peptides were analysed by SDS PAGE, 2D PAGE, Far UV CD spectroscopy, and Mass Spectrometry for structural characterisations, and by 2D Western blot and competitive IgE inhibition ELISA for allergenic properties. Results: Prolonged digestion with trypsin resulted of all three isoforms in digestionresistance peptides (DRPs), with masses close to the masses of the undigested forms. DRPs were identified, and their association by disulphide bonds was characterised. The secondary structure of the DRPs compared to the native counterparts was not changed. All three sets of DRPs exhibited virtually the same IgE-binding potency as the native conglutins. Conclusion: Digestion of peanut allergens Ara h 2 and Ara h 6 result in digestion-resistant peptides that resemble structure and IgE-binding from the native allergens, even although the peptide backbone is cleaved. Background: Natural Ara h 8, a Bet v 1homologous peanut allergen involved in the cross-reaction with birch pollen, is a low abundance, unstable peanut protein that is difficult to purify. Our goal was to produce recombinant Ara h 8 in Pichia pastoris for use in molecular diagnosis of peanut allergy. Method: Recombinant Ara h 8.0101 and de-glycosylated rAra h 8 were expressed in Pichia pastoris. The glycosylation site was silenced by substituting asparagine at position 80 with glutamine (N80Q), thus disrupting the N-glycosylation motif in Ara h 8 cDNA. Recombinant Ara h 8 and N80Q enriched ammonium sulfate fractions were purified by anion exchange chromatography followed by gel filtration chromatography. Identity of Ara h 8 was confirmed by liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry. N80Q was compared to rAra h 8 and natural Bet v 1 by SDS-PAGE and IgE Ab ELISA. Results: Expression of rAra h 8 in Pichia resulted in a mixture of hyper-glycosylated (19 kD) and non-glycosylated forms (17 kD) of Ara h 8. SDS-PAGE showed a reduction of glycosylation from 19 kD to 17 kD in Pichia pastoris expressed N80Q. The natural Bet v 1 band also appeared at 17 kD. Preliminary data confirmed immunoreactivity of rAra h 8-N80Q in an IgE Ab ELISA assay using sera from birchpollen sensitised individuals. Conclusion: Disruption of the N-glycosylation motif in rAra h 8 removed the hyperglycosylated forms in Pichia pastoris expressed rAra h 8. De-glycosylated rAra h 8 will distinguish peanut-sensitised individuals at risk of severe symptoms from those likely to have milder symptoms as a result of primary sensitisation to homologous tree pollen. Thus, rAra h 8 represents a critical molecular diagnostic tool for risk assessment of severe reactions to peanut. Aim of the study: To evaluate the prevalence of genuine sensitisation, co-sensitisation and pan-allergenes sensitisation in North-East Italian population. Method: Two hundred and fourty-four consecutive pollen sensitised patients (mean age 33; range 4-82) afferred to our Unit between December 2011 and December 2013 were evaluated by ImmunoCap ISAC (Thermo Fisher-Uppsala, Sweeden). Results: Sensitisations to Grass pollen, Birch, Cupressus, Olea Europea, Plantago, Artemisia, Parietaria, Mercurialis and Salsola resulted 24%, 16%, 17%, 12%, 5%, 7%, 2%, 6%, and 4% respectively. The molecoular profile of IgE to Phleum pratensae (Phl p) in patients with grass pollen allergy was: Phl p 1 = 80.5%, Phl p 2 = 44.7%, Phl p 4 = 51.5%, Phl p 5 = 53.7%, Phl p 6 = 31.5%, Phl p 7 = 2.6%, Phl p 11 = 23.1% and Phl p 12 = 15.2%. Positivity to Cyn d 1 was 67.9%. The combination of Phl p 1, Phl p 4 e Cyn d 1 covered 94.2% of grass pollen allergic patients revealed by skin prick tests. Positivity to Bet v 1, Bet v 2 and Bet v 4 in birch sensitised patients was 91%, 27%, and 5% respectively and to Ole e 1, Ole e 7 and Ole e 9 in Olea sensitised patients was 90%, 9%, and 3% respectively. Association between Bet v 1, Ole e 1, Cup a 1, Art v 1 and Par j 2 with the major allergen Phl p 1 resulted 42%, 37%, 48%, 18% and 10% respectively. Seventy percent of profilin positive patients resulted primarily sensitised to Bet v 1 and 30% to Phl p molecules. Sixty-three percent of polcalcin positive patients resulted primarily sensitised to Bet v 1 and 37% to Phl p molecules. Conclusion: The most prevalent pollen sensitisation in North-East of Italy is grass pollen followed by Cupressus, Birch and Olea. We confirmed Phl p 1 as the major allergen of grass pollen and its prevalent association with Cupressus followed by Birch and Olea. We also ascertain that the main allergen source of polcalcin and profilin sensitisation is rapresented by Birch pollen. In the context of a multicentric study on pollen and vegetable food allergy in Spain, we analysed the prevalence of nut allergy in a sample of 433 allergic patients to pollen and/or vegetables and 90 controls. We also analysed the sensitisation profile to components and the diagnostic capacity of ImmunoCAP ISAC 112 in patients allergic to peanut, walnut and hazelnut. Peanut, walnut and hazelnut allergic patients were selected by skin test and symptoms after intake of these nuts. Sixtyfour percent of the patients included in the study presented symptoms with nuts among which walnut was the most prevalent (20%), followed by peanut (18%), hazelnut (15%), chestnut (5.5%) and cashew nut (0.7%). Sixty-three percent of walnut allergic patients (n = 82) were sensitised to Jug r 3, 11% to Jug r 1 and 7% to Jug r 2. Fifty percent of peanut allergic patients (n = 74) had sIgE to Ara h 9, 11% to Ara h 6, 4% to Ara h 2, 3% to Ara h 1 and 1% to Ara h 3 and to Ara h 8. Fifty-two percent of hazelnut allergic patients (n = 65) were sensitised to Cor a 8 and 3% to Cor a 1.04 and to Cor a 9. Thirty, 45 and 42% of walnut, peanut and hazelnut allergic patients respectively did not show sIgE to any of the genuine components from these nuts present in the microarray. Seventy-two percent of these patients were sensitised to LTPs from other sources, 13% to profilins and 6% to storage proteins from other allergenic sources. Only 5% were not sensitised to any vegetable allergen included in this microarray. ISAC 112 presents a specificity near 100% and a 70, 48 and 58% sensitivity for the diagnosis of walnut, peanut and hazelnut respectively. The inclusion of other nut components could improve the sensitivity of the diagnosis of nut allergic patients in our environment. Insect cell-based production of allergenspecific antibody fragments for functional and structural analyses Background: Addressing the molecular basis of the interplay of the adaptive immune response remains difficult. The multivalent nature of antibodies and the heterogeneity of allergens and antibodies often hamper a detailed molecular dissection. Functional and structural analyses however demand the availability of allergen-specific antibodies in defined form, e.g. by the recombinant production of monovalent Fabs. Method: Single chain antibody fragments were converted to Fabs by fusion with human IgG1 CH1 and kCL. The Fabs then were produced by baculo-mediated infection of insect cells and purified by affinity chromatography. Functionality and affinity of resulting antibody fragments was shown by ELISA and SPR analyses. Results: Single chain formats with specificity for diverse antigens/allergens could be produced as assembled and secreted proteins in Sf9 insect cells with high yields. The proteins could be efficiently purified by different affinity chromatography approaches. Resulting allergen-specific Fabs showed pronounced reactivities in ELISA with their particular antigens. The affinities of the monovalent Fab antibodies could be assessed by SPR and compared to those of the full immunoglobulins. Conclusion: Recombinant production in insect cells is a suitable strategy for high yield production of allergen-specific Fabs and will facilitate downstream functional and structural analyses of the recognition of allergens by specific antibodies on a monovalent level. Background: Patients attending to an allergy office in Geneva, an international town situated in Central Europe, are of diverse ethnic origin. We aimed to analyze sensitisation profiles for panallergens PR10, profilin and LTPs, the profile of clinical food allergy in this population exposed at least to four pollens family groups. Methods: Seventy patients being consecutively included and investigated by Isac 112 over a 1 month period following clinical practice were described and classified in three groups: Western/Central/East Europe (30), South Europe (21), Asia/Africa/South America (19). Routine SPT panel, including SPT of LTP peach extract (ALK Abello), purified palm tree pollen profilin, ISAC-CAP 112 microarray and a careful clinical evaluation was performed. Results: 5/30, 3/21 and 7/19 were sensitised to LTPs, 13/30, 13/21 and 6/19 were sensitised to profilin while 14/30, 11/21 and 5/ 19 were sensitised to Betv1. 64.3% of LTP, 40% of profilin positive patients complain for food allergy, melon or water melon being the most prevalent. Profilin and LTP results on Isac were compared at different cut-off levels with SPT to pure profilin and SPT to peach extract. Isac without cut-off did not change the number of peach allergy diagnosis patient but allow to diagnose 36.4% more of melon allergy patients. Discussion: All studied groups showed a high prevalence of profilin, LTP and PR10 resulting in a high complex food related allergy. In Areas with a high pan-allergen sensitisation prevalence, the use of multiplexed platforms have become a routine diagnosis tool in our hands. LTP and profilin being present in all vegetables are not only ingested but inhaled through many pollens sources by this multi-ethnic community in a nearly annual daily basis, grass pollen sensitisation being predominant. Similar highly represented panallergens have been described in Spain making us think that this is not an isolated phenomenon and that exposure and cofactors conditions are very region dependent. Taking all this into account, this analysis confirms the absolute need for complex area for suitable use of SPT and micro-arrays technology in daily practice in order to be able to perform individually adapted successful treatments. Reference: Gay-Crosier F, Barber D, Bienvenu J: 'Allergy diagnosis in Geneva Area: a complex multi-ethnic community with high pan-allergen prevalence' P. 49. ISMA 2013, Vienna Background: Carbohydrate Cross-reactive Determinants (CCD 0 s) are glucidic epitopes, with significant structural homologies, prone to cause wide spectrum of cross-reactivity interactions between many different allergen protein families. This fact consist a confusing factor in in serumbased IgE assays. Objective: To study sensitisation profile to CCD 0 s, using component resolved diagnosis (CRD) technologies, in allergic patients from our geographic area. Methods: Three-hundred and twenty-six patients attended in Allergy Deparment (rhinitis and/or asthma and/or food allergy) with CRD test between 2012-2013, were included. Age ranged: 4-65 years. Component resolved diagnosis was performed by InmunoCAP-ISAC 112 (Ther-moFisher Scientific), LuxScan scanner (CapitalBio Corporation) and software (MIA v.3.1.2.) . Values ≥ 0.35 ISU were considered positive. We excluded Ole e 1 component due to its clinical relevance in our environment. Results: Twenty-four patients (7.3%) were positive to CCD 0 s. Twenty-three (95.8%) were positive to cypress Cup a 1. Twentytwo (91.6%) were positive to grass Phl p 4, nineteen (79.1%) to plane tree Pla a 2, eighteen (75%) to walnut Jug r 2, seventeen (70.8%) to Japanese cedar Cry j 1 and fifteen (62.5%) to bromelin MUXF3. Jug r 2 appears as only one allergenic component in 66% of positive patients to walnut while Pla a 2 is the single component in 42.1% of positive patients to plane tree and Phl p 4 in 31.8% o positives to grass pollen. Seventeen patients (70.83%) were positive to lipid transfer proteins (LTP 0 s) and all of them show the next pollen sensitisation profile: Cry j 1, Cup a 1, Pla a 2. Conclusion: The CCD-bearing allergen most frequently detected in our geographic area is Cup a 1. The main CCD-sensitisation marker is Jug r 2 instead of MUXF3. LTP 0 s allergic patients show a typical pollen sensitisation profile due to CCD 0 s cross-reactivity: Cup a 1, Cry j 1 y Pla a 2. Clinical relevance of these findings should be studied further. Determination of sIgE to rPhl p 1,5 and nPhl p 4 is necessary for optimal in vitro diagnosis of grass pollen allergy Nickmans, S 1 ; Bossuyt, X 1 ; Ceuppens, J 2 ; Van Hoeyveld, E 1 1 Laboratory Medicine/Immunology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 2 Internal Medicine/Allergy, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Background: In vitro diagnosis of grass pollen allergy (GPA) is based on detection of specific IgE antibodies (sIgE Ab) using natural grass pollen extracts, yet these have several disadvantages. Nowadays, component-resolved diagnosis is increasingly used for detection of sIgE Ab to specific allergen components. Method: A total of 307 adults referred to the allergy clinic with suspected inhalation allergy were questioned on symptoms and seasonal variation. Clinical history of GPA was considered positive if typical symptoms (rhinitis/conjunctivitis or asthma) were restricted to the grass pollen season, or worsened in May-July, especially upon pollen exposure. Skin prick tests (SPT) were performed and sera were collected from all patients. Specific IgE Ab to grass mixture (gx3) and grass components were detected by ImmunoCAP â (Thermofisher-Phadia). Results: A clear GPA history was retained in 141 patients. All 141 patients had sIgE for gx3 > 0.10 kU/l (sens.100%), whereas 134 had a positive SPT for grass pollen (sens.95%). Hundred and thirty-six patients had sIgE Ab >0.10 kU/l for rPhl p1,5 (sens 96.4%). Five patients with clear GPA history and positive sIgE Ab to gx3 (range 0.30-1.37 kU/l) showed no sIgE Ab to rPhl p 1,5. Sera from these patients were tested for other grass components ( Table  1) . All five had sIgE Ab to nPhl p 4 > 0.10 kU/l (range 0.16-1.88 kU/l). Because of its 10-15% carbohydrate content, sIgE Ab to nPhl p 4 might be attributable to the presence of anti-carbohydrate cross-reactive determinants (CCD) IgE Ab, therefore its clinical relevance remains a matter of debate. However, only 1 out of 5 patients had sIgE Ab to CCD (0.66 kU/l). Conclusion: Combined detection of sIgE Ab to nPhl p4 and rPhl p 1,5 had a sensitivity of 100% in our patient population with suggestive GPA history. It might provide a valuable, more complete alternative for gx3 for diagnosis of GPA. With the discovery of component-resolved diagnosis we are now able to analyze the type of sensitisation of our patients. Method: Twenty-three subjects were recruited, after present a clinical picture suggestive of LTP allergy with specific IgE to numerous fruits and dry-fruits. All of them included in a commercially avaible microarray of 103 allergenic components. Results: Thirty percent of the patients reveal anaphylaxis and 8.5% of them were exercise dependent; however, none had non steroidal anti-inflammatory hypersensitivity. The average total serum IgE was 208 UI/l (range 28-421). The most frequent molecular LTP components were nJugr3 and rPru p3, both found in 82% tested subjects. Artv3 was only identified in 50%, in contrast to previous studies in LTP allergic patients of Gran Canaria. Pollinosis was diagnosed in 60% of subjects: Artemisia vulgaris (42.9%), Phleum pratense (42.9%), Cynodon Dactylon (37.5%) and Olea europaea (28.6%) essentially. Twenty-nine percent presented with anaphylaxis, half of them being exclusively pollen allergic patients. House dust mite sensitisation was diagnosed in 52.2% of subjects: Dermatophagoides farinae (83.3%), Dermatophagoides pteronyssinusun (75%), Blomia tropicalis (50%) and Lepidoglyphus destructor (41.6%). None showed anaphylaxis, even though protection effect was not demonstrated. Conclusion: The majority of the LTP allergic patients in Gran Canaria recognise nJugr3 y rPrup3. Only half of them are house dust mites sensitisation's patients and it was not possible to demonstrate a protection effect on anaphylaxis brought LTP. Background: Molecular detection of allergenic components provides a large amount of allergen specific IgE antibody information in a single step. This enables patient investigations that require less time and resources. We try to obtain allergens map of asthma and allergic rhinitis of China using ImmunoCAP ISAC, provide more comprehensive distribution information of allergic patients. Method: Fifty-seven patients, diagnosed with asthma and/or allergic rhinitis based on GINA or ARIA guidelines, were recruited. SIgEs to 112 allergen components in sera were detected by Immuno-CAP ISAC (Phadia). We analyze the distribution of allergen components in patients with respiratory allergic diseases. To validate the credibility of ISAC, Der pteronyssinus Der p 1 and Der p 2 sIgE randomly selected from 47 patients were detected with ImmunoCAP (Phadia),and timothy grass (g6) sIgE from seven patients were also detected. Results: Seventy-four percent patients were sensitised to 2-4 allergens or 4-6 allergenic components. Among the 57 subjects, 74% showed IgE-reactivity to Der farinae Der f 2, 68% to Der f 1; 67% were IgE positive against Der p 1 and Der p 2, then followed by cat Fel d 1 (25%), bermuda grass Cyn d 1 (19%), grass pollen (Phl p 4 (18%) 、 Pla a 2 (11%)) and walnut Jug r 2 (11%). There were 5 (9%) patients simultaneously positive to anisakis Ani s 3, cockroache Bla g 7, shrimp Pen m 1 and Der p 10. Serum IgE positive to other allergens was in general low. All the seven cases Phl p 4 sIgE-positive were positive to g6. The specificities of ISAC were 100% when compared with ImmunoCAP, and the sensitivities were 82.9% and 87.5% respectively of Der p 1 and Der p 2. Conclusion: Most patients with allergic respiratory diseases are multi-allergen sensitised. The most prevalent allergens in allergic patients are dust mites, followed by cat, bermuda grass, timothy grass, plane tree and walnut. Pollen allergens are often neglected in southern China, but the positive rates to these allergens are not low. We found high cross-reactivity between house dust mites, cockroaches, anisakis and shrimp due to the common allergen protein: tropomyosin. Allergenic component sIgE test may provide accurate and reliable results which are useful for detailed analysis of allergen patterns and cross reactivities in allergic patients. Inhibition of phosphoinositide 3-kinase d attenuates Aspergillus fumigatus-induced allergic airway inflammation through regulation of NLRP3 inflammasome activation in mice and IL-1b in the lung. And, blockade of PI3K-d signaling using PI3K-d inhibitor or PI3K-d specific siRNA also markedly reduced increased protein expression of NLRP3 and caspase-1 in Aspergillus fumigatus-stimulated cultured tracheal epithelial cells. Furthermore, inhibition of PI3K-d improved various pathophysiologic features in Aspergillus fumigatus-induced allergic lung inflammation. Lastly, neutralization of IL-1b substantially reduced airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness in the Aspergillus fumigatussensitised and -challenged mice. Conclusion: These findings suggest that PI3K-d signaling influences Aspergillus fumigatus-induced allergic lung inflammation via the regulation of NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Background: House dust mites (HDM) are one of the commonest aeroallergens worldwide. With understanding the heterogeneity of asthmatic inflammation, the role of innate immunity has been highlighted in asthma pathogenesis. Specifically, NLRP3 is one of PRR systems activated by HDM extract in airway epithelial cells. However, there is little available information on the molecular mechanisms related to the activation of NLRP3 inflammasome in this situation. Method: In this study, we have investigated the effects of IC87114, a representative inhibitor of PI3K-d isoform, on the HDM-induced airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness. In addition, we tried to define the role of PI3K-d in the HDMinduced NLRP3 inflammasome activation in airways using primary cultured tracheal epithelial cells. Results: HDM-sensitised and -challenged mice showed the typical allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsivenss, and the increased levels of Th2 cytokines, IL-17, IL-1b, and TNF-a in lungs. Moreover, we found the increases of mitochondrial ROS and the NLRP3 inflammasome activation in HDM-exposed lung. Very interestingly, the administration of IC87114 decreased the numbers of airway inflammatory cells in BAL fluids, the peribronchial and perivascular inflammation in lung tissues, the increase in the levels of inflammatory cytokines, the levels of mitochondrial ROS, NLRP3 activation, and bronchial hyperresponsiveness in HDM-sensitised and -challenged mice. Primary cultured tracheal epithelial cells from HDM-inhaled mice showed the increased expression of NLRP3 compared to the levels in cells from control mice. Pretreatment with IC87114 or transfection of siRNA for PI3K-d dramatically reduced the expression of NLRP3 protein in primary cultured tracheal epithelial cells from HDM-inhaled mice. Conclusion: These findings suggest that PI3K-d plays an important role in HDMinduced bronchial asthma through the regulation of NLRP3 activation mediated by mitochondrial ROS. Allergic rhinitis (AR) manifests through upper airway (UA) symptoms, like itchy and runny nose, nasal congestion, sneezing, and watery eyes. Position paper of the EA-ACI based on the epidemiologic data documents that intractable cough can be one of the most common symptoms associated to the UA disorders including AR. Overthe-counter medications for symptomatic treatment of common cold and cough contain volatile substances like menthol, thymol, cineole or camphor, which are all agonists of TRPM8 ion channel, and they all are used on empirical basis without objective evidence about their effectiveness. We provide objective evidence of the efficacy of TRPM8 channel agonists on UA symptoms and cough in animal model. TRPM8 channel, so called menthol receptor is abundantly expressed on trigeminal afferents in the nasal mucosa. Dunkin Hartley guinea pigs were sensitised by intraperitoneal administration of ovalbumin (OVA). AR symptoms were induced by OVA (15 ll, 0.5%) intranasal instillation. Aromatic compounds (thymol, 1,8-cineole, camphor) were administered to the both nostrils (0.015 ml, 10 À3 M) 2 min prior to the OVA challenge, coughing was induced by citric acid (0.4 M) after 15 min after the onset of nasal symptoms or in due time interval in control challenge. The substances did not minimize nasal symptoms, and the symptom score was similar after all pre-treatments. Number of coughs arose to n = 25 AE 3 after the nasal allergen challenge (control n = 10 AE 2). Observed reduction of coughing to citric acid was significant for camphor and thymol, data for 1,8-cineole did not reach the significance (1,8-cineole 17 AE 3 vs thymol 13 AE 3 vs camphor 7 AE 2, P < 0.05). In healthy volunteers intranasal administration of thymol, (+)-menthol, (À)-menthol and 1,8-cineole (10 À3 M, 0.025 ml) significantly modulated cough threshold, urge to cough and cumulative cough response in capsaicin challenges. Effects of the mentioned substances on AR symptoms in volunteers are to be investigated. We have assessed with a numeric score (0-10) clinical diagnosis e and therapeutic utility of ISAC results for each pz. Descriptive statistics for the various groups were calculated and reported as medians (md) and interquartile range. Comparison of groups was performed by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test. A p-value ≤0.05 was considered as statistically significant. Results: Mann-Whitney test showed significant difference between diagnostic and therapeutic utility between 103 ISAC and 112 ISAC (P < 0.0001). Median values (interquantile range) for the groups: 5 (2,7) for diagnostic utility with 103 ISAC; 7 (6,8) for diagnostic utility with 112 ISAC; 5 (2,7) for therapeutic utility with 103ISAC and 7 (6,8) for therapeutic utility with 112ISAC. Conclusions: The 112 ISAC kit represents a useful and flexible method for allergy detection using allergenic molecules. As also shown by our initial experiments 112 ISAC is suitable for lead more carefully diagnosis and therapeutic decisions in pz with allergy (interquantile range have hight score in this pz). also analysed the sensitisation profile to components and the diagnostic capacity of ImmunoCAP ISAC 112 in patients allergic to peach, kiwi and apple. Peach, kiwi and apple allergic patients were selected by positive skin tests and symptoms after intake of these fruits. Eighty-three percent of the patients included in the study presented symptoms with fruits. Peach was involved in allergic reactions in 26% of the patients, apple in 14.5% and kiwi in 6.5% of the subjects. Eighty-two percent of peach allergic patients were sensitised to Pru p 3 and 7% to Pru p 1. Twenty-five percent of kiwi allergic patients presented sIgE to Act d 1, 11% to Act d 2 and 4% to Act d 5, while none of them had sIgE to Act d 8. Only 12.5% of apple allergic patients were sensitised to Mal d 1. Fifteen, 64 and 87.5% of peach, kiwi and apple allergic patients respectively did not show sIgE to any of the genuine components from these fruits present in the microarray. Sixty-nine percent of these patients were sensitised to LTPs from other sources and 31% to profilins. Almost 20% of the patients were not sensitised to any plant food allergen present in this microarray. ISAC 112 presents specificity near 100% and 84, 36 and 12% sensitivity for the diagnosis of peach, kiwi and apple, respectively, in our area. Since 16, 64 and 88% of the peach, kiwi and apple allergic patients, respectively, were not sensitised to any of the genuine components from these fruits and almost 20% of the patients were not sensitised to any plant food allergen present in this microarray, it would be of great interest to include new plant food allergens (others LTPs, thaumatins, etc.) to improve the sensitivity of the diagnosis of fruit allergic patients in our environment. The major indoor alleRgen components in sensitisation profile in patients with bronchial asthma Method: Ninety five children with confirmed food allergy were included in the study. Severity was classified in three groups of increasing levels. Sensitisation was evaluated by the allergen microarray immunoassay ISAC â 112. Analysis according to the age and the severity was realised for single component allergens and for molecular families: seed-storage proteins (SSP), pathogenesis-related proteins 10 (PR-10), tropomyosins, lipid transfer protein (LTP) and profilins. Results: Aeroallergens were the most prevalent sensitisations. For the whole population, the first food-related allergen was the peanut SSP Ara h 6, followed by Ara h 2 and then by PR-10 allergens. Plant foodderived allergens were the most frequent sensitisations in older children, whereas IgE to animal food-related allergens were more frequent in the earliest ages. Sensitisations to Ara h 6, Ara h 2, Bla g 7, Der p 10, Pen m 1, Ani s 3 or Act d 2 were significantly associated with severe food allergy (P < 0.04). Analysis by allergens families confirmed that sensitisation to tropomyosins (P = 0.03) or SSP (P = 0.002) was associated with a high risk of severe allergic symptoms. Conclusion: In this large population of food allergic French-living children, the most prevalent allergens were the peanut SSP Ara h 6 and Ara h 2, followed by PR-10 allergens. We found a significant correlation between severity of clinical symptoms and sensitisation to SSP or tropomyosins. No correlation was found between sensitisation to LTP allergens and clinical severity. Clinical and molecular characterisation of pollinosis due to Plane tree Background: Plane tree pollinosis is frequent in our area. Molecular diagnosis may improve the diagnostic and clinical characterisation. The aim of this study was to describe the clinical and molecular profile of patients allergic to plane tree. Method: Patients with plane tree pollen allergy from the area of Barcelona, Spain. Respiratory and plant food allergy symptoms were reported. Skin prick test (SPT) to a standard panel of inhalants and plant foods was tested, as well as to specific allergens from plane tree pollen (Pla a 1, Pla a 2, Pla a 8, Pla Thaumatin-like protein (TLP) and Lipid Transfer Protein (LTP) from peach (Pru p 3) and mugwort (Art v 3). For the serum allergen IgE determination a microarray of allergenic components (ImmunoCAP ISAC112) was carried out. Results: 24 subjects were recruited, mean age 39 AE 10.8, women 75%. All patients presented rhinitis while 42% also had asthma. Eighty-seven percent had concomitant plant food allergy. The culprit foods were mainly peach (86%) and nuts (43%). The clinical manifestations were urticaria (43%), oral allergy syndrome (38%), contact urticaria (33%) and anaphylaxis (28%). Pla a 1 was detected in 58.3% of all cases, Pla a 2 in 718%, Pla a 3 in 48%, Pla a 8 in 37% and TLP in 37%. There were no differences between asthma, rhinitis, and Pru p 3 allergy subgroups when analyzing the pattern of recognition of plane tree pollen allergens. Sensitisation to plane pollen allergens in the Pru p 3 group was: Pla a 1 57%, Pla a 2 71%, Pla a 3 52%, Pla a 8 33% and Pla TLP 33%. At least another LTP sensitisation was shown in 95% of cases. Conclusion: There is no characteristic pattern of plane tree pollen allergens when comparing rhinitis without asthma vs asthma group. Pla a 1 and Pla a 2 are the most frequent allergens, however Pla a 3 and TLP should be considered for the diagnosis and specific treatment. In plane tree pollinosis in context of Pru p 3 sensitisation, Pla a 3 is also a major allergen. There were no floor and ceiling effects and in all conditions a negative correlation between severity of the disease and the RAND score was seen. Only small differences in mean RAND score were found between atopic conditions. Asthma, eczema and especially recurrent infections had a significant negative impact on the RAND score (regression coefficients À0.86, À0.71 and À3.65 respectively). Conclusion: The RAND questionnaire is a valid instrument to assess HRQOL in children with respiratory and allergic symptoms. RAND scores are impaired in children with respiratory and allergic symptoms and most strongly effected by recurrent infections. Background: It has been proposed that rural residence is protective against atopy and asthma symptoms in developed countries, an effect attributed to farming and poor hygiene exposures. There are few data for eczema from developing countries concerning this issue. Objectives: To compare the prevalence of eczema in children and adolescents living in San Francisco city, Argentina and surrounding rural area. Method: This cross-sectional study included 1887 children (6-7 years) and 1804 adolescents (13-14 years) living in San Francisco city and surrounding rural area. ISAAC questionnaire was used to assess the prevalence of current flexural eczema. Results: A total of 1887 children aged 6-7 years and 1804 adolescents aged 13-14 years met elegibility requirements and were studied. Prevalence of eczema was higher in rural than urban setting (7.87% vs 6.69% p:NS) in children. In contrast, prevalence was higher in urban adolescents (9.96% vs 7.02% p:0;0007). Conclusion: In our study, eczema was more prevalent in rural schoolchildren and urban adolescents. Environmental risk factors must be evaluated in order to identify potential causes for the differences observed. Clinical comparison of airway hyperresponsiveness between continued treatment group and no treatment group for more than a year in asthmatic children Kondo, T 1,2 1 Hirano General Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Gifu, Japan; 2 Department of Pediatrics, Ogaki Municipal Hospital, Ogaki, Japan Background: As one indicator of long-term treatment for asthmatic children, we examine the usefulness of airway hyperresponsiveness. We compared the data of acetylcholine inhalation test to continued treatment group and no treatment group for more than a year. Subjects and method: We examined acetylcholine inhalation test by standard method, and the respiratory threshold of acetylcholine (RT-Ach) was compared to 153 cases of continued treatment (treatment group), and 95 cases of remission for more than a year (remission group). Therapeutic agents in the treatment group were mainly inhaled corticosteroid and leukotriene receptor antagonist. Results: The age of total cases were from 8 years to 21 years, and the mean age was 12.0 years. Mean age of treatment group was 11.4 years old, and remission group was 13.4 years old. Geometric mean of the RT-Ach in all cases was 2370 lg/ml, 1900 lg/ml in the treatment group, and 3700 lg/ml in the remission group. Significant difference was seen between two groups. Patients of 313 lg/ml or less were all in the treatment group. Geographic mean of serum IgE level was 456 IU/l in the treatment group, and 338 IU/l in the remission group. There was no significant difference. A case was treated by inhaled corticosteroid and leukotriene receptor antagonist. The RT-Ach was 313 lg/ml before treatment, and became to 10 000 lg/ml after 1 year. Then the treatment was quitted. Since then, the data of RT-Ach was maintained 10 000 to 20 000 lg/ml for 7 years without symptoms. Conclusion: The RT-Ach of remission group was improved to compare with treatment group. But serum IgE level was not decreased significantly. Airway hyperresponsiveness is one of the indicator of quitting treatment for asthmatic children. Background: Extended nitric oxide (NO) analysis such as alveolar NO has been studied ardently because it is not affected by exhaled flow rate. The aim of this study is to evaluate whether extended nitric oxide analysis parameters are correlated with bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) and bronchodilator response (BDR). Method: A total 200 children with a typical asthmatic symptom was evaluated. The exhaled nitric oxide test was done with methacholine challenge test for BHR on the same day for 126 children and spirometry before and after bronchodilator for BDR on the same for the other 73 children. We measured exhaled nitric oxides at 30, 50, 100, 200 mL/s and calculated J'awNO (total NO flux from the airways), alveolar NO, NO transfer factor and airway wall NO (CawNO) using Hogman and Merilainen algorithm. Atopy was defined as a positive skin test result or a more than 0.7 KUa/l specific IgE or a more than 150 IU/ml total IgE. Results: Among 200 children, atopic subjects were 83. In atopic children, J'awNO were significantly higher in the positive BHR (PC 20 < 16 mg/ml) than in the negative BHR subjects (P = 0.02) and correlated negatively with PC 20 (r = À0.408, P < 0.0001). In atopic children, J'awNO were significantly higher in the positive BDR (DFEV1 ≥ 12%) than in the negative BDR subjects (P = 0.006) and correlated positively with DFEV1 (r = 0.315, P = 0.016). In non-atopic children, CawNO were significantly higher in the positive BHR than in the negative BHR subjects (P = 0.012) and correlated negatively with PC 20 (r = À0.382, P = 0.012). In non-atopic children, CawNO were significantly higher in the positive BDR than in the negative BDR subjects (P = 0.002) and correlated positively with DFEV1 (r = 0.744, P = 0.001). Conclusion: The relationship of extended nitric oxide analysis parameters with BHR and BDR was different according to atopy. The J'awNO in the atopy and the CawNO in the non-atopy might give the useful information for understanding BHR and BDR in children with asthma. Background: Atopic children have increased levels of nitric oxide (NO) in exhaled air, and exposure to allergens further enhances lung inflammation and exhaled NO. The aim of the present study was to test the hypothesis that the route of allergen exposure (i.e. inhaled or ingested) can influence the primary localisation of the airway inflammation (i.e. central or more peripheral) and this is reflected as increased bronchial NO flux (BrNO) or alveolar NO concentration (AlvNO), respectively. Method: We recruited 79 atopic children and adolescents but no doctor-diagnosed asthma. Exhaled NO was measured at multiple exhalation flow rates and BrNO (J aw NO) and AlvNO (C A NO) were calculated. Serum ECP, EPX, MPO, total-IgE and gliadin antibodies as well as specific IgEs to timothy and egg-white were measured. Healthy schoolchildren (n = 66) served as control group. Results: Bronchial NO flux (BrNO, P < 0.001) and alveolar NO concentration (AlvNO, P < 0.001) were higher in atopic children than in healthy controls. In atopy, both BrNO and AlvNO correlated positively (P ≤ 0.001) with eosinophilic markers EPX and ECP. Atopic children were divided into two groups according to the presence of 1) timothy spesific IgE (posit n = 68, negat n = 11); 2) egg-white spesific IgE (posit n = 31, negat n = 48); and 3) antigliadin IgG (posit n = 28, negat n = 51). Interestingly, BrNO was significantly higher in the timothy-RAST positive than negative patients (P = 0.023), while there was no difference in AlvNO. In contrast, AlvNO was significantly increased in the egg-white sensitised group as compared to egg-RAST negative patients (P = 0.031), but there was no difference in BrNO. No differences in BrNO or AlvNO were found in antigliadin IgG positive and negative patients. Conclusion: The result suggest that the route of allergen exposure (inhaled vs ingested) does influence the localisation of airway inflammation which can be detected by measuring exhaled NO by multiple exhalation flow rate method. Hypo-antigenic and immune modulatory properties of a partially hydrolyzed cow's milk formula supplemented with prebiotic oligosaccharides dermatitis (AD) start in infancy, followed by respiratory sensitisation, bronchial asthma (BA) and allergic rhinitis (AR). The relationship of AR and BA in early ages may be critical to unveil mechanisms of the allergic march. To address the issue, we set up a cohort of infants with AD/FA and monitored the onset and progression of AD/BA prospectively. Methods: Study cohort includes 304 children (6-23 months old) with AD and/or FA and without a diagnosis of BA. Physician-diagnosed asthma, parental reports of persistent nasal symptoms, cytology of nasal secretions and IgE to common foodand inhalant allergens were examined at entry, 1 and 2 years of follow-up. Based on the presence/absence of the persistent nasal symptoms, nasal eosinophilia and HDM sensitisation, HDM AR-like phenotypes were defined as confirmed AR that fulfilled all three criteria and incomplete AR that had 2 of 3 criteria. Results: The level of IgE to food allergens decreased and both prevalence and levels of IgE to house dust mite (HDM), dog, cat, and pollens (especially, Japanese cedar pollen) drastically increased during the 2years period. Dog sensitisation among inhalant allergens was most prevalent at entry but was replaced by HDM during the follow up. The prevalence of confirmed AR increased from 2.8% at entry to 6.6% and 12.2% at 1 and 2 years follow-up, respectively. The proportion of children with incomplete AR also increased from 11.3% to 23.7% and 37.1%. Prevalence of physician-diagnosed asthma at 2 years was only 12%. Prevalence of nasal eosinophilia was drastically increased from 8.5% to 49.4% and 72.2%. Conclusions: Dog sensitisation precedes HDM sensitisation in this high risk cohort. BA may follow AR or mucosal eosinophilia. Premature birth and Intrauterine hypotrophysignificant risk factors for bronchial asthma Petrova, G 1 ; Miteva, D 1 ; Perenovska, P 1 ; Popov, T 2 1 Pediatric Clinic, Medical University Hospital 'Alexandrovska', Sofia, Bulgaria; 2 Clinic of Asthma and Allergy, Medical University Hospital 'Alexandrovska', Sofia, Bulgaria Background: A well known fact is that premature infants have at increased risk for the development of bronchial asthma (BA), but the significance of intrauterine hypotrophy (IUH) on the risk for development of BA remains unclear. Our goal is to determine the frequency and significance of IUH and low gestational period of birth for the occurrence of BA in nursing and children. Method: A prospective study of 42 infants treated in the Pediatric clinic of University Hospital 'Alexandrovska' aged 5 months to 5 years were divided according to the clinical diagnosis of two groups: Group Ichildren with bronchiolitis (n = 22) and group IIwith BA (n = 20). We examined: gender, weight, height and gestational period at birth and neonatal factors: mechanical ventilation (MV) and bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). Based on weight, gestational age at birth and sex defined fetal growth under the new growth curves for premature infants, Fenton 2013. IUH been established in children with birth weight <10th percentile. The results were processed by a statistical analysis of variance. Results: The mean gestational age of the BA group (28.5 weeks) was significantly lower than that of the children with bronchiolitis (31.2 weeks gestation). The frequency of IUH among patients with BA (25%) is several times higher than in the group with bronchiolitis (4.54%). The use of MV in the neonatal period was significantly more prolonged in children with BA and 75% of them are of BPD in comparison with 27% of children with bronchiolitis. Conclusion: Premature birth and IUH are significant risk factors for the development of BA in infant and children. Background: Discovering variables that can predict prognosis in patients with asthma can contribute to develop new approaches for monitoring of patients. In this study, we aimed to determine variables that can predict prognosis of childhood asthma in young adulthood period by evaluating their demographic and clinical characteristics as children. Methods: In this study, patients who were diagnosed asthma between 1995 and 2000 and followed in our clinic were examined. Patients were contacted by telephone and their symptoms of asthma in the previous years, level of asthma control according to GINA and risk factors that may affect asthma control were determined by a questionnaire that was sent to patients by e-mail. Result: This study included 106 patients; 63.2% were male, the mean age of the patients was 22.4 AE 3.7 years, 46.2% had atopy. Average age at onset of complaints was 36 AE 33 months, age at diagnosis of asthma was 48 AE 34 months and follow-up period was 17.7 AE 2.99 years. Of all patients, 35.8% had asthma symptoms during last years and 39.6% had symptoms during last 3 years. Twenty six patients were still using anti-inflammatory treatments. (24.5%). Presence of allergic rhinitis during the previous year or at the time of diagnosis, presence of moisture and mold at home or presence of atopy at the time of diagnosis were more frequent in patients who had stil had asthma symptoms (P = 0.004, P = 0.001, P = 0.004, P = 0.009 respectively). Gender, age of onset of symptoms, age at diagnosis of asthma, time under regular follow-up and treatment were not different between patients with or without clinical remission (P = 0.524, P = 0.267, P = 0.0760, P = 0.116 respectively). Conclusion: In young adulthood, symptoms of asthma continue approximately in one-third of patients whose symptoms began in childhood. In particular; atopy, presence of allergic rhinitis, presence of moisture and mold at home at the time of diagnosis are risk factors for persistence of symptoms. The effect of immunotherapy and immunomodulators combination to Th17 and Treg cells in asthmatic children Barlianto, W; Olivianto, E; Kusuma, HC Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric, University of Brawijaya, Malang, Indonesia Background: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease that is dominated by T helper-2 (Th2) type cytokine. Some studies have suggested that other CD4+ T cell subsets may play a role in asthma, including Th17 cells and regulatory T cells (Treg). Immunotheraphy can modulate immune respon in allergic disease and have been proven effectively in asthma. Black cumin and probiotics as immunomodulators have effects on the immune modulation in allergic diseases. No studies have proved the effects of immunotherapy and immunomodulators combination for asthma. This research aims to study the changes of Th17 and Treg cells following administration of immunotherapy and immunomodulators combination in asthmatic children. Method: Thirty one mild asthmatic children were divided into four groups, immunotherapy, immunotherapy combination with black cumin, probiotics, and probiotic plus black cumin. Treatment was done for 14 weeks. Th17 (CD4 + IL-17 + ) and Treg (CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 + ) analyzed using flowcytometri. Clinical improvement was assessed with Asthma Control Test (ACT). Th17, Treg, and ACT were measured before and after treatment. ANOVA was used to compare the mean of differences. Results: Statistical analysis found no significant differences in the mean number of Th17 and Treg cells between pre and post treatment in all groups. There were no significant differences of Th17 and Treg cells count among the immunotherapy and the immunomodulators combination groups. All groups showed improve of ACT scores. Conclusion: Immunotherapy with or without immunomodulators combination did not changed Th17 and Treg cells count but improved the clinical symptom in asthmatic children. Time trends in the prevalence of asthma in Brazilian adolescents: a 18 years study older ages showed a better perception of the TWF which were in better agreement with their sensitisation profile. Clinical aspects of asthmatic children followed in the Pediatric Program on Asthma Prevention (PIPA), Uruguaiana, Southern Brazil Urrutia-Pereira, M 1 ; Acosta, V 2 ; Avila, JB 1 ; Sol e, D 3 1 Pediatric Program on Asthma Prevention (PIPA), Uruguaiana, Brazil; 2 Hospitala Juan Pablo II, Corrientes, Argentina; 3 Federal University of São Paulo -Escola Paulista de Medicina, São Paulo, Brazil Background: PIPA was developed to reduce the impact of recurrent wheezing/ asthma in poor children living in Uruguaiana, South of Brazil. Method: 75 children (aged from 5 years 6 months to 16 years) attending PIPA (total n = 646, from 6 months to 16 years) were evaluated during 2013 regarding: clinical (allergic background, environment) and laboratory data (serum levels of total IgE and vitamin D) and evaluation of pulmonary function. They were classified according to asthma severity (ISAAC's criteria) as: mild asthma (MA, n = 40, <4 attacks/y) and moderate/severe asthma (MSA, n = 35, more than 4 attacks/y). Parametric and non-parametric statistical tests were applied. Results: Groups were similar regarding: gender, age, height and weight (at birth and current), genetic background, environment and socioeconomic status. To be born by cesarean section and to have poor performance at school were significantly associated with MSA (OR:56.7, respectively) . Almost 70% of the children were sensitised to aeroallergens (house dust mites being the most frequent). However, to be sensitised to Alternaria alternata was significantly associated with MSA (OR: 8.1, 95% CI: 0.92-70.8). Low levels of vitamin D were observed in 75% of children and high levels of total IgE were observed in most children, without differences between groups. There were no differences in regard to pulmonary function parameters. Only 8.5% of the MSA group had been treated with inhaled corticosteroids before entering PIPA. Conclusion: This preliminary study showed that birth by cesarean section, to have poor school performance, and be sensitised to Alternaria alternata were associated with asthma severity. The follow-up of these and other patients in PIPA project will allow us to learn more about asthma and certainly to establish more effective preventive measures aimed at reducing asthma morbidity in these children. Clinical phenotypes of children with problematic severe asthma Konradsen, J 1,2 ; Nordlund, B 1 ; Hedlin, G 1,3 1 Women 0 s and Children 0 s Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; 2 Pediatric Allergy and Pulmonology, Karolinska University Hospital, Astrid Lindgren Children 0 s Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; 3 Centre for Allergy Research, Karolinska Institutet, Background: Children with problematic severe asthma (PA) have recurrent symptoms despite extensive treatment. The clinical presentation of children with PA is heterogeneous; some children have chronic symptoms whereas others have recurrent exacerbations, with or without symptoms between exacerbations. The pathophysiological explanation of the different clinical presentations is not known. The objective was to describe the frequency of the different clinical phenotypes in a Swedish cohort of children with problematic severe asthma and to investigate associations to pathophysiological characteristics of asthma. Method: Fifty-seven children (42% females), aged 6-18 years (mean 13) with problematic severe asthma (SA) were investigated. Data included asthma control test (ACT), spirometry (FEV 1 %), measurement of exhaled nitric oxide (FENO), eosinophils and IgE antibodies in blood, and assessment of bronchial hyper-responsiveness (BHR) to methacholine (Dose response slope). Children with an ACT score of £19 were classified as having the 'chronic symptoms' phenotype whereas those who had received more than one burst with oral corticosteroids the preceding year were classified as having the 'exacerbation' phenotype. Results: Thirty percent of the children (n = 17) had chronic symptoms only, 19% (n = 11) had exacerbations only and 47% (n = 27) had both. Children with chronic symptoms had a reduced ACT score compared to those with exacerbations only 16 vs 21, P < 0.001, but there were no significant differences in age (14 vs 12, P = 0.12), prescribed inhaled corticosteroids (800 mg vs 800 mg, P = 0.96), FEV 1 % (85 vs 82, P = 0.67), bronchial hyperresponsiveness (11 vs 11, P = 0.88), IgE (280 vs 200, P = 0.82), FENO (20 vs 15, P = 0.15) and blood eosinophils (0.4 vs 0.5, P = 0.57). Similar results were obtained when comparing those with both chronic symptoms and exacerbations to those with either phenotype. Conclusion: Children with exacerbations only might have a normal score on the Asthma control test and are at risk of underestimation of the severity of their disease. Vitamin D may be essential for restricting the development and severity of allergic diseases and asthma, but a direct causal link to vitamin D deficiency has yet to be established. Background: We have previously shown that vitamin D controls granulocyte levels in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in an allergen-sensitive and gender-specific manner also influencing the level of respiratory bacteria. In another study we have shown that the commensal bacteria in the lung is separate from the gut microbiota and dominated by Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes and Cyanobacteria species. In this study: In order to further test our hypotheses that vitamin D modulates the lung microbiota to regulate asthma development, we have examined the effects of vitamin D deficiency in early life on commensal bacteria with 16S rRNA gene sequencing performed on lung specimens from na€ ıve and mice with induced allergic airway disease. Lungs were obtained from adult female and male BALB/c offspring born to female mice fed vitamin D-supplemented or -null diets. A 2 mm 3 sample of the lung was snap-frozen and DNA was extracted from right lung lobe using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue DNA extraction kit as described by the manufacturer (Qiagen). We used a customized 16S rRNA pyrosequencing protocol amplifying the V3-V4 region, to characterise the lung microbiome. In some mice allergic airway disease was induced by sensitising and boosting mice with ovalbumin (with alum, i.p.), with a fortnightly interval between the sensitisation and boost, followed a further week later by a single aerosol of ovalbumin, with lung samples collected 24 h post-aerosol challenge. The gut microbiome has been extensively studied for its links to development of disease. Here we suggest that also the lung microbiome (and vitamin D) could also regulate inflammatory lung diseases. Further research is needed to understand the contribution and regulation of the lung microbiome and the gut-lung axis in the development of lung diseases such as asthma. The developmental gut microbiota is modulated towards a pattern closer to breastfed infants by a partially hydrolyzed cow's milk formula supplemented with specific prebiotic oligosaccharides Wopereis, H 1,2 ; Sim, K 3 ; Shaw, A 3 ; Martin, R 1 ; Oozeer, R 1 ; Warner, JO 3 ; Knol, J 1,2 ; Kroll, JS 3 ; on behalf of the PATCH Investigators 1 Nutricia Research, Utrecht, The Netherlands; 2 Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University and Research Centre, Wageningen, The Netherlands; 3 Imperial College, London, United Kingdom Background: The protective effects of breastfeeding against infections and potentially also allergy, is in part attributed to the presence of non-digestible oligosaccharides in human milk which impacts the developing gut microbiota of infants. Aim: To study the effects of early life nutrition on gut microbiota composition in infants at risk of atopy by using an optimised 16S rRNA-gene based sequencing method. Methods: This study is part of a parent study registered with trial number IS-RCTN65195597. Infants at increased risk of atopy were randomly assigned, if parents within 1 month of birth decided to stop exclusive breastfeeding (BF), to receive partially hydrolyzed formula (pHF) containing a specific mixture (0.8 g/100 ml) of oligosaccharides including short chain galacto-oligosaccharides and long chain fructo-oligosaccharides (9:1), or standard cow's milk formula (control) for the first 6 months of life. The gut microbiota composition and activity was determined in faecal samples of a subset of vaginally born infants (n = 51 for pHF containing prebiotic oligosaccharides, n = 57 for control and n = 30 for BF). The gut microbiota was analysed by 16S rRNA sequencing, and stool pH and major microbial metabolites were determined. Results: Intake of pHF containing prebiotic oligosaccharides was associated with increased abundance of Bifidobacteria and decreased abundances of taxa within the Firmicutes. Furthermore, decreased stool pH, lower concentrations of propionate and butyrate and increased concentrations of lactate and acetate were observed. Overall the gut microbial composition and activity in infants receiving pHF was more similar to the BF reference group than to the control group. Bacteroides and Veillonella were more abundant, and Coriobacteriales less abundant, in BF infants than in either of the formula fed groups. Conclusion: Intervention with a pHF containing a specific mixture of prebiotic oligosaccharides modulates the developmental gut microbiota towards a pattern closer to BF infants. Future investigations will be directed towards association of these gut microbial changes with allergic outcomes in these subjects. An enterobacteriaceae dominated fecal microbiome is associated with differences in leukocyte DNA methylation and eczema in infants Background: We hypothesized that gut microbiome composition alters the epigenome and mediates allergic sensitisation. Methods: We sampled infant stools at 3 months and saliva at 12 months and administered a questionnaire to study the relationship between fecal microbiome, epigenome, and allergic outcomes over the first year of life. We characterised gut microbial communities by barcoded pyrosequencing of 16S rRNA genes and analyzed genome-wide DNA methylation from salivary DNA using arrays. Results: Feces of 4/7 infants with eczema had predominant Proteobacteria (≥50%) with decreased or absent Bacteroidetes, while 4/6 infants without eczema had predominant Bacteroidetes (≥50%). There was a correlation between clinical outcomes (period prevalence of eczema and wheeze) and microbiome composition at the phylum, class, order and family levels (Mantel test; P values ≤0.051, ≤0.031, ≤0.037, ≤0.032, respectively). Proportions of taxa differed between children with and without eczema with significance at the same taxonomic levels (one-way ANOSIM; P values ≤0.04, ≤0.04, 0.04, ≤0.05, respectively). SIMPER results showed that Enterobacteriaceae was the predominant taxon associated with eczema. DNA methylation was measured in eight infants, four of which had abundant fecal Proteobacteria. Methylation of 49 of 308,000 CpG sites was associated with abundant fecal Proteobacteria based on ttests (P ≤ 5 9 10 À4 ); significance was further confirmed using Mann-Whitney tests (all P values <0.03). Among the genes having differential methylation were NOTCH2 and ORMDL1. Notch2 has specific roles in differentiation and function of immune cells such as B cells and dendritic cells. OR-MDL1 belongs to the protein family includ-ing ORMDL3, the first asthma susceptibility gene found using GWAS. Conclusion: For the first time we show that differences in human gut microbiome are associated with differences in leukocyte DNA methylation and period prevalence of eczema. NIH NIAID ERIN U19AI090872. Allergic rhinitis may impact the recovery of pulmonary function tests after moderate/severe asthma exacerbation in children Background: During an asthma exacerbation, pulmonary function test parameters (PFTs) return to their baseline values within a few weeks time. Factors affecting the recovery of PFTs other than the severity of exacerbation are not well-known. The primary aim of the study was to determine the risk factors for recovery of PFTs >7 days after a moderate to severe asthma exacerbation in children. Method: Children who had moderate to severe asthma exacerbation performed serial pre-bronchodilator PFTs on day 1, 3, 7 of the exacerbation and then once weekly until their PFTs reached a plateau. All children received systemic corticosteroid for 3 days and inhaled salbutamol as long as they needed. Results: Fifty seven children were recruited. When all PFTs were considered, 42% and 74% of children recovered within 7 and 14 days, respectively. The last recovered PFT parameter was FEF 25-75 . Allergic rhinitis (AR) (P = 0.016), persistent AR (P = 0.005) and severe asthma exacerbation (P = 0.009) were significantly higher in children whose PFTs recover >7 days; only severe asthma exacerbation was different for recovery >14 days (P = 0.048). Logistic regression analysis revealed that AR and severe asthma exacerbation increases the recovery of PFTs >7 days by 4.3 (95% CI: 1.29-14.67) and 8.1 (95% CI: 1.51-44.43), respectively. Conclusion: Recovery of PFTs during a moderate/severe asthma exacerbation may prolong until 4 weeks. Apart from severity of the exacerbation, AR is a significant factor affecting the recovery time of PFTs therefore may impact asthma management. This issue reinforces the combined treatment of AR and asthma. Introduction: Ageing is associated with an impaired immune response to infections. Respiratory viruses and bacteria are among the most important factors involved in the pathogenesis and exacerbations of asthma in older patients. The aim of the study was to detect respiratory viruses and bacteria in the lower airways of asthmatics and to associate the presence and types of pathogens with age and clinical characteristics of asthma. Methods: Fifteen elderly (>65 years of age) and 14 younger (aged 30-50) patients with stable asthma (>6 weeks without cold symptoms) were included. Patients were assessed for the disease control and severity and the spirometry, SPT testing and FeNO measurements were performed. Sputum was induced by inhalation of increased concentrations of NaCl (3%, 4%, 5%). The presence of virus and bacteria in the induced sputum samples was detected by multiplex RT-PCR (Seeplex RV15 ACE Detection, and Seeplex PneumoBacter ACE Detection, Seegene, Seoul, Korea). Results: Streptococcus pneumoniae was found in all 29 patients, Haemophilus influenzae in 15 (51.7%) asthmatics and two patients (6.9%) had Chlamydophila pneumoniae. The most commonly detected viruses were Influenza A (in 48.3% of patients), Respiratory Syncytial Virus B (37.9%) and Respiratory Syncytial Virus A (27.6%). Rhinovirus, Coronavirus and Adenovirus were found in less than 10% of all patients studied. The bacterial coinfections were found in 15/29 (51.7%) patients. The bacterialviral co-infections were detected in 21/29 (72.4%) asthmatics. The profile of detected pathogens was similar in elderly and non-elderly subjects. In the elderly asthmatics FluA infection was associated with lower ventilatory levels (FVC% pred). Elderly patients had significantly higher eosinophil and lower macrophage and lymphocyte counts in the induced sputum. Conclusion: Detection rates and patterns of respiratory viruses and bacteria in the induced sputum are similar in the elderly and non-elderly asthmatics. range 6 to 78) and the CU duration range was 1-5 years.ASST was positive in 12 patients (28%) (7 male/5 female). The prevalence of autoinmune disease was 16.7% (two patients) in autologous serum skin test positive group and 13.3% (four patients) in negative group. The autoinmune diseases diagnosed in the positive test group were autoimmune chronic gastritis and chronic autoimmune thyroiditis. In the other hand, in the negative group test the diseases diagnosed were diabetes mellitus type 1 and chronic autoimmune thyroiditis (three cases). The prevalence of autoimmune disease between both ASST positive and ASST negative did not show any statistical significance (P = 0.7680). Conclusion: ASST positive and ASST negative patients showed no differences in terms of prevalence of autoinmnune diseases. Screening of underlying causes in acute urticaria and/or angioedema Muresan, A-M 1 ; Popa, LG 2 ; Giurcaneanu, C 2 1 Allergist, Private Practice, Bucharest, Romania; 2 Elias Emergency University Clinic Hospital, Bucharest, Romania Background: Acute urticaria may or may not have a certain cause or trigger. The EAACI/WAO guideline: 'definition, classification and diagnosis of urticaria' does not recommend any routine diagnostic tests in acute spontaneous urticaria. Method: A group of patients suffering from acute urticaria was evaluated taking into consideration the clinical background and the results of laboratory tests. Results: Parasitic infections were found in some patients. Conclusion: An etiological screening in acute urticaria might be useful in some cases. The relevance of infections is to be further studied. Marton, C Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Oradea County Hospital, Oradea, Romania Background: Chronic urticaria represent an important part of daily allergy practice, being a common condition all over the world, characterised by appearance of short-lived weals and/or angioedema, associated with itching or burning. It's prevalence vary in different studies from 1% up to 30%. It is well known that infections may play an important role in the pathogenesis of chronic urticaria, but the role of intestinal candida is still controversial and some labs do not look Candida spp. in stool culture. Method: In study were taken 14 patients with cronic spontaneous urticaria that had no other findings except the presence of intestinal Candida. Other causes were excluded: bacterial infections of the nasopharynx or gastrointestinal tract (H. pylori), parasite infections (Giardia lamblia, Toxocara canis, Blastocystis hominis), viral infections (viral hepatitis), hipersensitivity to food pseudoallergenes (patients followed 4 week diet low in pseudoallergenes and not shown any decrease in disease activity), autoreactivity, type I allergy, cronic inflammatory processes, drugs, other types of urticaria. Results: Patients were treated according to the antibiogram, then retested for intestinal Candida. Nine of 14 patients were free of Candida after the first treatment and then ceased antihistaminic treatment with bilastine, with no recurrence of urticaria. Three patients needed more cures to resolve Candida but urticaria persisted. Two patients had chronic intestinal Candida but urticaria was in complete remission. All patients were followed for 12 months. Conclusion: Although it has not a great statistical significance, the study show that intestinal Candida spp infection may have an important role triggering urticaria and we need to search in detail for all causes of chronic urticaria, trying to cure urticaria, when possible. Dysregulation of coagulation pathway in patients with chronic urticaria: global coagulation assessment using thrombin generation assay ment). In one patient, symptoms recurred after H1-antihistamines and prednisolone were stopped. One CSU-patient showed no response to omalizumab, also after prolongation and dosage elevation up to 450 mg. The patient suffering from cold contact urticaria did not show clinically relevant improvement after 3 months of treatment. Adverse events were reported in three patients (60%) and consisted of headache, fatigue, and short-term malaise. Conclusion: Omalizumab seems to induce and maintain remission in patients with chronic spontaneous urticaria, treated with immunosuppressants. In one patient, prednisolone could be tapered off completely after treatment with omalizumab, and remission was remained. Omalizumab may be effective in treating chronic spontaneous urticaria when this is accompanied by angioedema or anaphylaxis. Background: Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome (MRS) is considered a rare syndrom consisting of the triad of persistent or recurrent orofacial swelling, relapsing facial paralysis and plicated tongue. It generally presents in oligosymptomatic forms, so an accurate incidence of MRS is difficult to determine. Therefore, MRS may not be rare because it may often go undiagnosed. Case report: A 48 years old woman presented with 1 year history that started with swelling of the chin, right-side of the face and upper lip. In 2 days she recovered without any medication. After 2 weeks she had swelling of the right-side of the upper lip. The swelling of the upper lip apared again a week later. She was diagnosed with angioedema. In 2013 she presented in our clinic with swelling of the upper lip accompanied by incomplete paralysis of the right-side of the face and afissured tongue. No drugs, no history of trauma, infections, allergies or aphthous ulcerations. Ophthalmological examination, and of all other systems were normal. SPT for the inhalant allergens and foods were negative. Specific IgE antibodies against allergens were absent. Electromyography revealed paralysis of the right facial nerve. Montelucast 10 mg was recomanded for 2 months, and after 1 month her problems were improved. Discussion: In 1928, Melkersson, described a 35-year-old woman with facial edema and paralysis. In 1931, Curt Rosenthal, described three patients who had fissured or plicated tongues in addition to orofacial swelling and facial palsies and proposed a link between the triad of symptoms. The most common symptom of MRS is recurring orofacial swelling in which the upper lip is more often affected. The etiology and pathogenesis of lesions associated with MRS are unknown. Abnormal regulation of the autonomic nervous system leads to excessive permeability of the facial cutaneous vessels. Non specific antigens stimulate the perivascular cells to form granulomas that cause obstruction of perivascular vessels that is an causative factor in the swelling. Other theories are the viral component or allergies and autoimmunity. We present a case of the MRS with the classic triad of symptoms, eventually diagnosed with MRS after being misdiagnosed with refractory angioedema, and wellcontrolled with antileucotriene. Conclusion: MRS is a refractory angioedema that could be controlled with long term treatment of antileucotriene and short term treatment of corticosteroids. The presence of refractory angioedema must lead us to the diagnosis of MRS. Is omalizumab effective in cases of angioedema and urticaria unresponsive to treatment? Bulut, _ I 1 ; € Ozs ßeker, ZF 2 1 Sureyyapasa Chest Disease and Chest Surgery Training Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey; 2 Immunology and Allergy, Sureyyapasa Chest Dısease and Chest Surgery Training Hospıtal, Istanbul, Turkey Case 1: (A, K) 25 years old male patient presented to our clinic with complaints of urticaria and attacks of angioedema that has been present for 13 years. Case 2: (M, M) 42 years old male patient presented to our clinic with complaints of urticaria and attacks of angioedema that has been present for 2 years. Both patients described urticarial complaints that has been getting worse in last months; attacks of angioedema on lips and other body parts; getting more frequent recently. Liver function tests and complete blood count tests were within normal limits. Collagen tissue markers like RF, ANA, ANT _ I-DS DNA (N). thyroid function tests, and thyroid autoantibodies were within normal limits as well. C4 and C1 q Esterase levels were normal too. Total Ig E level in case one was 294 ku/l; compared to 598 ku/l in case 2. Skin prick tests done with respiratory and food allergen skin prick tests were negative. Both patients has been given medications like antihistaminics, systemic steroids, mast cell stabilizers, leukotrien receptor antagonists in high doses and combinations. These treatments failed to control angioedema and urticarial attacks. Then the patients were taken to omalizumab treatment. Case-1 was given Omalizumab 150 mg flk 1 9 2 (300 mg) and case-2 was given omalizumab 150 mg flk 1 9 4 (600 mg) (Once in 14 days) With this treatment, angioedema and urticaria attacks were succesfully controlled. Conclusion: Omalizumab can be considered as an alternative treatment option in chronical urticaria and angioedema cases unresponsive to conservative treatment. Introduction: Cholinergic urticaria is a common form of physical urticaria triggered by heat, excercise, sweating and emotional factors. It is thought to be resulting from post ganglionic sympathetic activation of sweat glands. Hereby we are presenting two cases of cholinergic urticaria which occurs rarely. Cases: A 15 years old male (E.A) and 20 years old male (B.C ß ), both having no history of previous atopic diseases like asthma, allergic dermatiti sor rhinitis applied to our clinic with complaints of urticaria that was triggered excercise and sweating, independant of heat. They described papuler rashes of 2-3 mm diameter that appeared following a violent itching in upper thorax, head and neck region. These symptoms had subsided within 30 or 40 min after onset. Method: Excercise test for cholinergic urticaria (Running for 15 min at 29 degrees centigrade) and provocation tests to exclude other forms of physical urticaria. Basal triptase levels was measured as: (E, A) 2.83 UG/L, (B, C ß ) 2.08 UG/L Result: Provocation tests for cholinergic urticaria was found as positive. Also, otologuous sweat tests with prick tests were positive too. Although most of the complaints had subsided with administration of 25 mg hidroksizin and Desloratadin-Montelukast; they stil complained of mild itching following excercise. Discussion: Very few cases of cholinergic urticaria have been reported so far. More researches need to be done to illuminate the mechanism of cholinergic urticaria. The proper diagnosis and treatment of this condition will substantially affect the life quality of the patients. (rTNSS; AM + PM, max = 24) was assessed primarily. CFB in rTNSS and each nasal symptom score (max = 6 each) was assessed over time. Results: Overall, MP29-02* patients had sig. greater reduction in rTNSS vs FP, AZE & PLA (relative diff: 47% to FP; 66% to AZE) evident from treatment day 1 (P ≤ 0.015) vs FP, AZE or PLA and sustained for 14 days. The level of relief achieved by MP29-02* patients on Day 2 (À3.40) was not achieved before Day 5 by FP patients or Day 9 by AZE patients. With MP29-02*, a consistent pattern of superior relief was noted for each symptom on each day, with benefit observed over AZE or FP from day 1 and sustained. FP and AZE provided more inconsistent symptom relief. For congestion, the level of relief provided by MP29-02* on Day 2 (À0.77) was not achieved before Day 6 and Day 9 for FP and AZE, respectively. Conclusion: The consistent and rapid alleviation of all nasal symptoms is unique to MP29-02* and contributes to its superiority over AZE and FP. The time advantage over firstline therapy in achieving sig. relief and sustained effect should improve patient concordance. MP29-02*'s rapidity & effectiveness in relieving nasal congestion, should reduce need for decongestants. MP29-02* is considered a new standard of care in AR. Background: Most seasonal allergic rhinitis (SAR) patients have ocular symptoms during the season. New treatments should provide rapid & sustained relief from these symptoms. We assessed the efficacy of MP29-02* (a novel intranasal formulation of azelastine hydrochloride (AZE) and fluticasone propionate (FP) in an advanced delivery system) in providing ocular symptom relief vs AZE, FP or placebo (PLA). Method: Six hundred and ten moderate/ severe SAR patients (≥12 years) were randomized into a double-blind, PLA-con-trolled, 14-day, parallel-group, trial (NCT00660517) to MP29-02*, AZE, FP or PLA (one spray/nostril bd; daily doses: AZE = 548 lg;FP = 200 lg). 1 Overall & daily change from baseline (CFB) in reflective total ocular symptom score (rTOSS; AM + PM, max = 18) was assessed and CFB over time for each ocular symptom score (max = 6 each). Results: MP29-02* patients had greater rTOSS reduction vs FP, AZE or PLA (relative diff:58% to FP, 35% to AZE), from Day 2 (À2.12) vs FP (P = 0.010) or PLA (P < 0.001), and from Day 3 (À2.90) vs AZE (P = 0.029) & sustained for 14 days. The level of relief for MP29-02* patients on Day 2 (À2.12) was not reached before Day 8 for FP patients. The level of relief achieved by MP29-02* patients on Day 3 (À2.90) was not reached before Day 9 for AZE patients. This pattern of rapid and sustained symptom relief by MP29-02* was observed for each ocular symptom. For ocular itching, the relief provided by MP29-02* on Day 2 (À0.77) was not achieved before Day 10 for FP-patients. The level of relief provided by MP29-02* on Day 3 (À1.06) was not achieved by AZE-patients before Day 11. Conclusion: The consistent & rapid effect of MP29-02* in alleviating all eye symptoms contributes to its superiority over AZE and FP. The time advantage over firstline therapy in achieving sig. relief & sustained effect could improve patient concordance and reduce the need for eye drops. MP29-02* is considered a new standard of care in AR. Background: Moderate-to-severe allergic rhinitis (AR) is poorly controlled. Patients remain symptomatic on treatment, even multiple therapies. A more effective treatment is needed. We assessed the efficacy of MP29-02* (a novel intranasal formulation of azelastine hydrochloride (AZE) and fluticasone propionate (FP) in an advanced delivery system) for symptomatic relief during different seasons and for different symptoms and severities vs AZE, FP or placebo (PLA). Method: Four thousand and twenty-two moderate/severe SAR patients (≥12 years) were randomized into four double-blind, PLA-controlled, 14-day, parallel-group trials to MP29-02*, AZE, FP or PLA nasal sprays (one spray/nostril bid), during the Texas mountain cedar (MP4001), Spring (MP4002), Autumn (MP4004) and Spring/ Summer (MP4006) seasons. Overall change from baseline (CFB) in reflective total nasal symptom score (rTNSS) was the primary endpoint. It was assessed by severity post-hoc (median baseline rTNSS >18.9: more severe; ≤18.9:less severe). CFB in individual nasal and ocular symptom scores was also assessed. Results: The response to MP29-02* was consistent across seasons; mean CFB À5.5, -5.5, À5.6 and À5.6 in each study. Nasal symptom relief was sig. greater with MP29-02* than with FP or AZE in all studies. In study MP4001 the relative difference was 47% to FP (P = 0.0031) and 66% to AZE (P < 0.0001). For less severe patients the relative difference to MP29-02* was 42% vs FP (P = 0.0188) and 64% vs AZE (P = 0.0002), increasing to 49% and 70% vs FP (P = 0.0436) and AZE (P = 0.0035), respectively for more severe patients. Similar results were seen in the other studies. MP29-02* provided superior relief from all nasal and ocular symptoms than AZE or FP, which was particularly evident for congestion & ocular itching. Conclusion: MP29-02* provides consistently superior symptomatic relief than an intranasal antihistamine or corticosteroid in AR patients regardless of Season, Symptom or Severity. It is the drug of choice for AR. A new allergic rhinitis therapy (MP29-02*): all of ARIA in one puff treat. There is a subset of patients who are refractory to Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA)-defined rhinitis management approaches. 1 Even though new treatments have been made available for symptomatic relief, no new class of medication was forthcoming, until recently. The situation has now changed. MP29-02* is a novel intranasal formulation of azelastine hydrochloride (AZE) and fluticasone propionate (FP) in an advanced delivery system. It benefits from antihistamine, mast-cell stabilizing, anti-leukotriene and anti-inflammatory properties, made up in a unique formulation and delivered using an improved device (vs marketed FP formulations). This product provides more effective relief than the current gold standard treatment, intranasal corticosteroids (INS). A recent publication by Meltzer et al., 2 reassessed the efficacy of MP29-02* vs current firstline nasal sprays in an innovative and clinically relevant way by responder analyses. The authors determined different response cut-offs from 30 to 90%. A meaningful and statistically significant improvement was noted in moderate-to-severe AR patients following 14 days of MP29-02* treatment. A response ceiling of ≥60% was identified above which INS failed to differentiate from placebo. This may explain why moderate to severe AR patients still complain of bothersome symptoms despite ARIA-guided treatment. Patients who remain symptomatic on monotherapy should experience a significant reduction in their symptoms with MP29-02*, exceeding that which they have experienced in the past, and many days faster than an INS. MP29-02* comprises all the pharmacological principles foreseen in the ARIA treatment algorithm. allergic diseases and asthma. The right human physiological amounts of Vitamin D, obtained by sun exposure, decrease with increasing of geographic latitude. In western countries, the lack of Vitamin D is widespread. There is increasing evidence that vitamin D regulates immune responses promoting the allergic diseases. Unlike the theory of the decrease in the prevalence of allergic diseases in a narrowing of latitude, the incidence of Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis (VKC) decreases with increasing latitude. The VKC etiopathogenesis is still unclear, but there are many potential triggers: environmental (sunlight, hot and humid climate, latitude), hormonal (the frequency is higher in males and the disease heals with the pubery), immunological and genetic factors. The patients with VKC have an immuno-allergic response that leads to the formation of giant papillae commonly observed on the superior tarsal (tarsal VKC) or limbal conjunctiva, (Horner-Trantas dots: limbar VKC) or in both districts (mixed VKC). Because of the increase of VKC incidence in seasons with higher UV irradiation, we aim to evaluate the possible lack of vitamin D (25 OH Vitamin D) in children whose exposure to the sun is avoided by the worsening of eye symptoms in these environmental conditions. Method: To evaluate the serum vitamin D levels in children with VKC a study is made in Fatebenefratelli/Oftalmico and Melloni Hospitals in Milan. Serum vitamin D level between 20-30 ng/ml is consider a slight deficiency, while level <20 ng/ml is insufficient. Results: Sixty-six children with moderateto-severe VKC presented blood vitamin D levels at an average of 24.72 AE 12.74 ng/ ml, median 22.35 ng/ml. Only 22.72% of children with VKC (15 out of 66 children) had normal vitamin D levels (30 ng/ml). Twenty-six out of 66 children (39.4%) had severe deficiency of vitamin D (<20 ng/ml), by considering the need for dietary vitamin D supplementation, as has been seen in children with allergy. Conclusion: The VKC is therefore a disease with immuno-allergic pathogenesis, with different triggers, and the involvement of potential nutritional deficiencies similar to other chronic diseases. The VKC requires a multi-specialised monitoring for both an exhaustive search of the possible pathogenetic mechanisms and for an adequate diagnostic and therapeutic follow-up with a possible therapeutic supplementation of vitamin D. Background: Allergic fungal rhinosinusitis (AFRS) is a non-invasive form of chronic sinus disease and is most frequently found in immunocompetent, atopic individuals who present with difficult to treat rhinosinusitis and nasal polyposis. This disease is associated with an IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction against fungal antigens. AFRS is thought to represent 5% to 10% of all cases of chronic rhinosinusitis although the incidence varies, depending on geographic areas. Methods and results: A 46-years-old man with a 2-years history of bilateral progressive nasal obstruction was sent to our outpatient clinic. The patient had allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and asthma due to grass pollen, nasal polyps and a deviation of the nasal septum operation. He was working in a greenhouse. In the last 6 months he had a yellow mucopurulent nasal discharge and anosmia unresponsive to topic corticosteroid therapy. We performed skin prick tests (SPTs) for common allergens, spirometry, hemogram, total and specific IgE and computed tomography (CT) scan of nose and paranasal sinuses. Positive SPTs were obtained with Lolium, Olea, Cupressus, Plantago and Platanus pollen, house dust mite, cat and dog dander and Aspergillus. Pheripheral blood eosinophils were 300/mm3. Total serum IgE was 3150 kU/l. Specific IgE (kU/l) was lolium 33.7; Olea 36.3; Cupressus 0.66; Platanus 76.9; Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus 2.05; cat 2.81; dog 1.61 and Aspergillus >300. The spirometry values were normal. The CT images revealed nasal polyps in maxilar and sphenoid sinuses. Mucosal thickening with retained mucosal secretions involved most of paranasal sinuses with presence of microcalfications in the right maxillary sinus, which could indicate a fungus ball. Surgical endoscopic, Functional Endoscopic Sinus Surgery, operation was performed in such a way that the whole mentioned sinuses were opened and cleaned transnasally. Microbiological studies of the paranasal sinus content revealed a positive culture for Aspergillus fumigatus. After the surgical intervention the patient was treated with topical corticosteroids. With all these data the patient was diagnosed of AFRS. Conclusions: We present a case of AFRS due to Aspergillus fumigatus. This entity requires high degree of suspicion by the physician because it presents with rhinosinusitis and nasal polyposis that per se are rarely conclusive. What an eye opener! An Unusual presentation of allergic fungal rhinosinusitis with multiple mixed phenotypes 
