ee7f2ea0e04f0ae57ca964e0cce3535a5345accd
Combining digital image analysis with ngTMA construction: Lessons from a study analyzing CDX1 and CDX2 in colorectal cancer Does histopathological scoring system predict complications in pedi- atric patients with Crohn's diesease?
V  Barresi L Reggiani Bonetti S  Bettelli A  Maiorana Policlinic G Martino A A Foda M  Ahmed M  Sami H  Wagih S  Nolte I  Zlobec A  Lugli W  Hohenberger R  Croner S  Merkel A  Hartmann C  Geppert T  Rau O  Fabian O  Hradsky K  Potuznikova L  Hornofova J  Bronsky L  Krskova A  Kalfusova J  Zamecnik 


Objective: To assess and compare the mutational status of KRAS, NRAS and PIK3CA in poorly differentiated clusters (PDC) of neoplastic cells and corresponding main tumour tissue in colon cancer (CC). Method: Twenty-five CCs with KRAS mutation and at least 10 PDC in a 20× microscopic field were considered. Tumour cells forming PDC and main tumour mass were separated by laser microdissection and KRAS, NRAS and PIK3CA mutational status was analyzed in each of the two components by using mass spectrometry. Results: In 20 cases PDC had the same biomolecular profile as the main tumour, but in 2 cases they had WT KRAS and in 3 cases they had additional PIK3CA mutations not observed in the main tumour. Cases with PIK3CA mutations in PDC but not in the main tumour had higher frequency of nodal metastases (P = 0,07), high pTNM stage (P = 0,07) and LVI (P = 0,07), although statistical significance was not reached. Conclusion: Intra-tumour heterogeneity in biomolecular profile of CC may depend upon different histological aspects. Since PDC reflect epithelial mesenchymal transition and they are likely to produce metastatic disease, their molecular status, if different from that of the main tumour, may be relevant for prediction of response to targeted therapies. Characterization of MEK1 and DIAPH3 expressions in colorectal mucinous and non-mucinous carcinomas with relation to clinicopathological parameters and prognosis Objective: The exact role of MEK1 and DIAPH3 in colorectal carcinogenesis is not yet well known. This study aims to investigate expression of MEK1 and DIAPH3 in colorectal mucinous adenocarcinoma (MA) and non-mucinous adenocarcinoma (NMA), and their relation to clinicopathological and survival data. Method: Tumour tissue specimens from 75 patients with colorectal MA and 75 NMA were included in the study. All clinicopathological data of these 150 cases were revised with re-examination of all their slides. Three high density manual tissue microarrays were constructed and immunohistochemistry for MEK1 and DIAPH3 was done. Results: Cytoplasmic MEK1 and DIAPH3 were overexpressed in 74 and 73 CRC cases (49.3 and 48.6 % respectively). NMA showed significantly higher MEK1, but not DIAPH3, expression than MA. MEK1 overexpression was significantly associated with positive lymphovascular emboli in the NMA group and with old age in MA group. DIAPH3 overexpression was not significantly associated with any of the tested variables. MEK1 overexpression was associated with better overall survival. Conclusion: MEK1 and DIAPH3 have a significant interrelated role in colorectal carcinogenesis, especially in the non-mucinous type. Unlike DIAPH3, MEK1 overexpression is associated with better survival. Patients with non-mucinous carcinomas, and not mucinous ones, can benefit from MEK1 and DIAPH3 targeted therapies. Objective: Immunohistochemical biomarker evaluation on TMAs is a standard technique. Until now, few attempts have been made to retrieve the maximum information from digital pathology during construction of TMAs and their subsequent analysis. As CDX2 (and CDX1) may have potential predictive power as colorectal cancer biomarkers, we aim to assess their robustness in terms of pre-analytics, tumour heterogeneity and effects of different intensity-percentage combinations on patient selection and prognosis. Method: Next-generation tissue microarrays (ngTMA) of 636 colorectal cancer patients with cores covering tumour center and invasive front were immunostained for CDX1 and CDX2, scanned and analysed using Tissue Studio software (Definiens) Pre-analytical variables analysed included storage and fixation times. Three different types of heterogeneity were defined and investigated; prognostic relevance was determined. Results: A complete ngTMA-DIA workflow can optimize on-target punching and leads to less core-loss. Pre-analytically both biomarkers were stable. Over 7 million epithelial cells of finally 612 accessible patients were labelled. Tumour heterogeneity was only slightly detectable as a mosaic, but excluded for the targeted differences between center and front as well as for occurrence of haphazard hot/cold spots. CDX1 and CDX2 protein loss are independent biomarkers of worse prognosis in multivariate analysis. Two-dimensioned intensity-percentage graphs can highlight the differences in cohort stratification and patient selection. Conclusion: Tumour heterogeneity of CDX1 and CDX2 is minimal and protein expression is stable over different fixation and storage times. Both markers are prognostically relevant. However, we recommend that CDX2 loss be evaluated as percentaged complete negativity. New standards for digital image analysis are needed. Objective: It is hypothesized that tumour buds in colorectal cancer represent an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-like phenotype. Here, we determine the existence and frequency of an epithelial/mesenchymal double-positive cell type and its origin in colorectal cancer. Method: One tumour block from a patient with high-grade tumour budding was cut, immunostained for cytokeratin (CK) and scanned. Using digital pathology, regions of tumour buds, tumour center and normal stroma were annotated, aligned to the block and punched out. Punches were dissociated into single cell suspensions and fluorescently-labeled with CK and vimentin (VIM). Using DepArray technology, cells were sorted based on their single or double-positivity and analysed by NGS (Ion Torrent 50-gene cancer panel). Results: Tumour and stromal fractions contained only CK+ or VIM+ cells, respectively. In the budding fraction, 10 (2.9 %) CK+/VIM+ double-positive cells were identified. Sequencing revealed that CK+ tumour cells carried mutations in BRAF and TP53 and a deletion in PTEN. The exact same mutational profile was seen in the CK+/VIM+ cells. VIM+ stromal cells were negative. Conclusion: CK+/VIM+ double-positive cells exist at the invasion front of colorectal cancer, albeit in low number. These cells originate from the tumour. Whether this is evidence of EMT in colorectal cancer requires further elaboration. Objective: Treatment of neoplasias with ipilimumab, a monoclonal antibody against CTLA-4, has been associated with the development of immune-mediated colitis. Aim of this study was the evaluation of histological and immunological characteristics of ipilimumab-associated colitis (IAC) in 9 patients with severe diarrhea after treatment for metastatic melanoma. Method: The histological features of IAC were evaluated in 9 colonic biopsies. The mucosal immunophenotype was assessed by examination of the inflammatory infiltrate, including semi-quantitative immunohistochemical characterization of lymphocytic subsets and by measuring the relative mRNA expression for lymphocyte-lineage specific transcription factors and cytokines. Results: Histological characteristics were non-specific, highly resembling Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis exhibiting a predominance of either plasma cells or CD4+ T-cells with high CD4/CD8 ratios. Neutrophils and crypts with mucin depleted flat epithelium were almost constantly present. IAC was related to significant upregulation of Th1 and Th17 immunological effector pathways, with high elevations of IFN-γ (>10-fold increase over baseline) and IL-17A (>5-fold increase). In addition, elevation of the regulatory T cell markers Foxp3 and IL-10, and the TNF-like cytokine TL1A/TNFSF15 was observed. Conclusion: Ipilimumab administration usually results in IBD-like colitis probably ascribed to increased influx of effector lymphocytes and enrichment of the mucosa milieu with pro-inflammatory mediators. Objective: The prevalence of loss of protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in Lynch syndrome (LS) polyps remains poorly studied. We aimed at describing the prevalence of loss of MMR protein expression in LS-associated polyps and to identify independent predictors of MMR deficiency. Method: 171 colorectal polyps (121 adenomas, 50 serrated lesions) from 53 LS patients (18 MLH1,22 MSH2,10 MSH6,3 PMS2) were IHC stained with MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 proteins. Clinicopathological variables associated to pathological IHC were assessed. Results: The median size of adenomas was 5,2 mm;19 (15,7 %) > 10 mm;11 (9,1 %) were villous and 15 (12,4 %) showed high-grade dysplasia (HGD). IHC was pathological in 69 (57 %) adenomas. In univariate analysis, variables associated with pathologic IHC staining were: female genre (p = 0,04), rectal location (p = 0,02), MLH1 mutation (p = 0,03), HGD (p < 0,001) and size >5 mm (p = 0,001). PMS2 mutation was inversely associated to protein loss (p = 0,03). In multivariate analysis, independent predictors were: HGD (p = 0,02), PMS2 mutation (p = 0,03) and size >5 mm (p = 0,03). Serrated lesions retained protein expression. Conclusion: In LS patients, large adenomas and those with HGD were associated with loss by IHC. Adenomas with PMS2 germline mutations and serrated lesions tended to retain protein expression. Normal IHC in colorectal polyps should not discard a LS diagnosis. Gastric microbiota and carcinogenesis: The role of non-helicobacter pylori bacteria. A systematic review A. Galaghar * , E. Dias-Jácome, A. Silva, D. Libânio, M. Borges-Canta, P. Objective: Immunohistochemical characterization of histone methyltransferase EZH2 expression in a series of colorectal cancer (CRC) patients, and correlation with clinicopathological features. Method: CRC patients primarily submitted to surgery at Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto (2003 -2006 were selected; one representative slide/block per case and relevant clinicopathological data were retrieved. Assessment of EZH2 nuclear expression (median percentage ± interquartile range) in normal mucosa and CRC using a semi-automated software system. Results: A total of 199 cases were selected: median age: 70 years; 111(55.8 %) male; 141(71.0 %) left colon tumours. All cases were adenocarcinomas (5 mucinous; 194 tubular, 183 low-grade); 16 (8,0 %) presented lymphatic invasion; 33 (16.6 %) were stage I, 77 (39.0 %) had lymph node metastases and 21 (11.0 %) displayed distant metastases. EZH2 was overexpressed in CRC (36.70 ± 30.9) compared to normal colon (5.90 ± 7.40). EZH2 expression was significantly higher in right colon tumours (p = 0.022) and in CRCs with regional lymph node metastases (p = 0.047). Age, gender, histological pattern, tumour grade, lymphatic invasion, tumour extent and presence of distant metastasis at diagnosis were not associated with EZH2 expression. A trend for higher EZH2 expression in stage III/IV tumours compared to stage I/II tumours was depicted (p = 0.065). Conclusion: EZH2 may play a role in cell growth and invasion in colorectal carcinogenesis. Quantitative EZH2 immunoexpression might be a promising biomarker for assessing CRC clinical aggressiveness. Survival analysis (ongoing) will determine if this biomarker might be of prognostic relevance. The role of the central pathology lab in SPECTAcolor E. Szepessy * , A. Gheeraert, A. Poncin, E. Varin, A. Atasoy, P. Hönscheid, T. Gorlia, R. Salgado, D. Aust * EORTC, Medical Dept., Brussels, Belgium Objective: The objective of SPECTAcolor (Screening Patients for Efficient Clinical Trial Access) is to build a quality assured, clinically annotated colorectal cancer biobank for molecular tumour profiling for optimized trial access and for biomarker discovery and validation. Method: After informed consent, clinicopathological data are captured and FFPE tumour material is collected in SPECTAcolor central biobank. Only patients with sample deemed adequate by the central pathologist are enrolled. Samples are analysed for MSI and with targeted exon-NGS. QA/QC criteria are pre-defined and applied from biobank selection to NGS data reporting. Quality performance is monitored also via participation in proficiency testing programs. Results: SPECTAcolor recruited 900+ patients with~900 centralized samples: 15 % biopsy and 85 % surgical specimens. 3.6 % of them were rejected due to low tumour cellularity (<30 %). Block failure rate for DNA extraction was 4.5 % (3.6 % surgical vs. 11 % biopsy samples). DNA from~800 blocks was sequenced: 524 passed, 163 pending and 105 failed.~450 NGS patient report was released via a secured web portal. NGS sample failure rate was highest during library preparation due to low amount of DNA (DNA < 100 ng: 34 % vs. DNA >200 ng: <2 %). Conclusion: A logistically complex infrastructure including qualitycontrolled HBM collection and management for next generation trials in multinational setting is feasible. Objective: The molecular alterations of pancreatic acinar cell carcinomas (ACCs) are not completely understood and the possible role of c-myc amplification in tumour development, progression, and prognosis has been poorly investigated. In the present study we evaluated the prognostic role of c-myc amplification and its nuclear protein expression in a series of 48 well characterized pancreatic ACCs. Method: Gene amplification was investigated using interphasic FISH analysis simultaneously hybridizing c-myc and the centromere of chromosome 8 probes (Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA) . Protein expression was investigated with immunohistochemistry using a specific rabbit monoclonal anti-c-myc antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Results: 6/48 (12.5 %) ACCs showed c-myc amplification and six (12.5 %) showed c-myc nuclear immunoreactivity. However, only 3 cases showed simultaneous c-myc amplification and nuclear protein expression. C-myc immunoreactivity was not associated with patient's prognosis, while c-myc amplification was statistically associated with worse prognosis (p: 0.04). Conclusion: c-myc amplification is present in about 12 % of pancreatic ACCs and identifies a subset of more aggressive neoplasms. OFP-02-004 Programmed cell death and immune response by modulated electrohyperthermia in colorectal cancer allografts T. Vancsik * , E. Kiss, C. Kovago, N. Meggyeshazi, T. Krenacs Objective: Currently there is a priority for searching of new selective cellular-target anticancer drugs for ampullary carcinoma (AC). Targeting therapy requires information about mutational status of cellular target. Aim: To compare two methods of KRAS-gene mutational status analysis in DNA samples from tumour tissue. Method: We analyse specimens of 24 patients with ampullary carcinoma. Molecular investigation was provided in samples containing at least 80 % of tumour tissue. Analysis was performed using two methods: Sanger sequencing (2nd exon) and digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) (p.G12D иp.G12V). Results: In 87.5 % of cases tumour was presented as moderatelydifferentiated adenocarcinoma; in 12,5 % cases-as well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Results of Sanger sequencing revealed KRAS-gene mutation in 33.3 % of cases (8 of 24): five of them had p.G12D and three-p.G12V. Analysis of ddPCR results revealed 10 additional mutations in an amount of 0,1-2,82 % of mutated allele. Thus, there were 75 % (18 of 24) cases with KRAS-gene mutation: 12 cases had p.G12D, 3 cases-p.G12V and 3 cases-both p.G12D and p.G12V. Conclusion: Comparative analysis of two methods of molecular-genetic investigation showed high sensitivity of ddPCR method, which could be recommended for practice in clinical oncology for analysis of mutational status of RAS-family genes in patients with ampullary carcinoma. OFP-02-008 Epithelium-mesenchyme transformation in pancreas duct adenocarcinoma O. Paklina * , G. Setdikova, T. Sotnikova, N. Pospekhova, V. Shubin * Botkin Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Moscow, Russia Objective: Most researches are currently focused on epithelium-stroma relationship that plays an important role in epithelial tumour progression towards to de-differentiated phenotype. Method: 100 patients with PDAC. Molecular analysis was performed in 21 cases. aSMA, PanCK, CK 7, vimentin, and EMA (Dako, Lab Vision Flex) . Evaluation of changes in genes ZEB1, ZEB2, CDH1,VIM using real-time PCR on frozen sections previously prepared in the lysis buffer. Objective: The objective of the study is to assess the viability and functional status of neutrophil granulocytes in contact with tumour cells in vitro. Method: Due to the co-incubation of pure fraction of neutrophilic granulocytes and cell lines of tumour cells HEp-2 (human laryngeal epidermoid carcinoma) and RD (human rhabdomyosarcoma) at 37°C for 30-60 min, oxygen-dependent metabolism was revealed to enhance greatly (NST-test) in neutrophils in 30 min, and the absence of neutrophilic granulocytes was recorded in an hour, only light green DNA neutrophils threads were visualized by staining of native preparation with methylene blue Evans Sytox Green fluorescent dyes, at the same time the morphology of the tumour cells did not change and there was a significant oxygen-dependent metabolism of tumour cells (NST-test) . Results: Microscopy has shown monolayer of tumour cells, neutrophils were not visualized; alsoa monolayer of tumour cells was noted to belimited to the strands of DNA neutrophils, some peripheral tumour cells were completely wrapped with strands of nuclear matter. Conclusion: Thus, the experiment proved the neutrophils trapping the tumour cells to be activated and die, forming networks of DNA strands, which are likely to limit the peripheral and tumour cell proliferation. Objective: A multimodal clinicopathological approach to diagnosis of neoplastic mucinous cysts (NMCs) is optimal. Those with high grade features or malignancy on cytology require resection. Our aim is to establish the accuracy of cytological grading and KRAS mutational status in predicting high grade (HG) or malignant NMCs. Method: Cytological grade and KRAS mutational status of NMCs diagnosed between 2011 and 2016 were compared with histological grade and presence of invasion at resection. Cases diagnosed as HG (including suspicious) and malignant on cytology were reclassified as high risk (HR) , and all others as low risk (LR). Results: There were 54 LR and 26 HR NMCs on cytology. Cytologyhistology correlation was available for 38 resected cases. The positive predictive value and sensitivity of HR cytology for HGNMCs with and without malignancy was 82.35 and 77.78 %; and LR cytology for LGNMCs was 80.95 and 85 % respectively. KRAS was mutant in 20 NMCs; 14/45 LR and 6/11 HR cytology and was not discriminatory. Twenty-eight of 42 non-resected cases had clinical follow-up; 16(57 %) with LR cytology were stable NMCs, 4(14 %) with LR cytology developed HR features, while 8(29 %) with HR cytology were malignant in behavior on follow-up. Conclusion: 1. The 2-tiered grading system shows a high level of accuracy in predicting carcinoma, HGNMCs, and LGNMCs. 2. KRAS mutation is specific for a diagnosis of NMC but not discriminatory in risk stratification. OFP-03-010 Adequacy of cytology specimens for molecular testing in lung adenocarcinoma I. Rolim * , R. Fonseca, F. Cunha * IPOLFG, E.P.E., Dept. of Pathology, Lisbon, Portugal Objective: Molecular testing of lung adenocarcinoma helps select patients for therapy with epidermal growth factor (EGFR) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) inhibitors. Although cytology samples are considered acceptable specimens for molecular testing, most studies have focused on biopsy samples. Herein we summarize the results of 2 years of EGFR/ALK testing, based on cytology specimens, carried out at our Institution. Method: The database of the Institution was retrospectively queried for EGFR/ALK testing performed in cytology specimens of lung adenocarcinomas, during 2014-2015. Results: A total of 57 cases were analyzed for EGFR mutation status and ALK translocation, when relevant. Forty-five cases correspond to FNA samples and 12 were exfoliative specimens. Quality DNA for EGFR status evaluation was obtained in 89 % (n = 40) of FNA smears (8/40 (20 %) mutated) and in 67 % (n = 8) of exfoliative smears (5/8 (63 %) mutated). Quality DNA for ALK translocation analysis was obtained in 28 % (n = 9) of FNA smears (1/9 (11 %) translocated). Conclusion: The low percentage of insufficient samples for EGFR evaluation (11 % for FNA and 33 % for exfoliative specimens) and the rates of EGFR mutation and ALK translocation, that are only slightly higher than the literature for FNA specimens, support the adequacy of cytology smears for molecular testing in lung adenocarcinoma. OFP-03-011 Antibody specificity, epitope retrieval, and detection method sensitivity as important determinants in the immunohistochemical detection of programmed death ligand 1 J. Cogswell * Objective: Theaimofthisstudywastoinvestigatetherole ofcytologypleural effusion examination in an attempt to diagnose Tuberculous infection. Method: Fifty two pleural effusion cases from Hasan Sadikin General Hospital Bandung were reviewed in this study. All cases were sputum AFB positive and histopathologically showed typical Tuberculosis appearance on pleural biopsy. Results: The mean age of the patient were 39.2 years and 35 (67 %) were male. Almost all (92 %) effusions were Rivalta positive, with mean level of Lactic dehidrogenase and Glucose were 1598.4 U/L and 84.7 mg/dL consecutively. The cytological finding showed moderate to high cellularity but 3 cases (5.8 %) were hypocellular. Lymphocyte predominance was observed in 43 (82.7 %) cases. Six (11.5 %) cases were polymorphonuclear cells predominance. All cases showed scanty mesothelial cells. Proteinaceous background was found in 23 (44.2 %) cases. There were no epitheloid cells observed in all cases. Conclusion: Lymphocytes predominance and absence or scanty mesothelial cells were highly suggestive for Tuberculous pleural effusion. Cytology examination alone cannot confirm the diagnosis of Tuberculous infection. Objective: This study attempts to gain insight in polyploidy in Uveal melanoma (UM) and supplement old data with current knowledge on mutations in UM specific genes. Method: In 202 patients the ploidy status of the UM was determined using cytogenetic analysis, FISH, MLPA and/or SNP array analysis. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the BAP1 expression and mutation analyses of BAP1 (coding regions) or the hotspots for the SF3B1, EIF1AX, GNAQ and GNA11 genes was carried out using Sanger Sequencing or Whole-Exome Sequencing. Results: Twenty-three patients had a polyploid UM (11.4 %). Polyploid tumours were larger (15.61 mm versus 13.13 mm, P = 0.004), and more often showed loss of heterozygosity of chromosome 3 (P = 0.003). No difference in occurrence of mutations between polyploid and diploid tumours was observed. Polyploidy did not affect survival (P = 0.143). BAP1 mutation was the only significant independent prognostic predictor for patients with polyploid tumours, with a 16 fold increased hazard ratio (HR 15.90, P = 0.009). Conclusion: Patients with polyploid UM do not differ from diploid UM based on prevalence of mutations in the UM related genes. Similar to patients with diploid UM, BAP1 mutation is the most significant prognostic predictor of metastasis in patients with polyploid UM. OFP-04-002 SF3B1 and EIF1AX mutations in uveal melanoma R. M. Verdijk * , S. Yavuzyigitoglu, A. Koopmans, K. Smit, J. Vaarwater, D. Paridaens, E. Kiliç, A. de Klein OFP-04-005 Pattern of IgA and C3 staining in 76 biopsies with staphylococcus infection associated glomerulonephritis A. Satoskar * , S. Suleiman, J. Hemminger, S. Brodsky, C. Bott, E. Calomeni, G. Nadasdy, T. Nadasdy * Ohio State University, Dept. of Pathology, Columbus, USA Objective: IgA-dominant immune complex deposits (along with C3) are considered key diagnostic features in Staphylococcus infection-associated glomerulonephritis (SAGN). However recent articles have reported that Staphylococcal endocarditis associated GN may show pauci-immune pattern and positive ANCA serology, causing diagnostic overlap with ANCAassociated GN. This has important implications in regards to choice of antibiotics or immunosuppressives. Immunosuppressive therapy is essential in ANCA GN, but can be detrimental in endocarditis-associated GN. Method: We studied the immune complex pattern in detail and also presence or absence ANCA serology in our single-center cohort of 76 patients with SAGN from January 2004 to January 2016. All 76 patients had culture proven Staphylococcal infection. Results: Out of the 76 biopsies with SAGN, 27 (36 %) had focal crescents or segmental necrotizing lesions. Pauci-immune pattern on immunofluorescence (trace to weak IgA, IgG and C3 staining) with scant to absent electron dense immune-type deposits was seen in 11/76 (14 %) of the biopsies and 7 of these 11 biopsies also had crescents. Trace/scant staining for IgA was seen in up to 26 % of the biopsies. Even C3 staining was trace/scant in up to 14 % of the biopsies. One patient had all three features-focal crescents, positive ANCA serology and a pauci-immune pattern on immunofluorescence staining and ultrastructural examination. On electron microscopic examination, only 24 out of 76 (32 %) biopsies showed subepithelial humps. Conclusion: Weak to absent IgA does not preclude the diagnosis. C3 is usually present. Pauci-immune pattern of deposits and positive ANCA serology although infrequent, are potential diagnostic pitfalls in SAGN. Subepithelial humps are seen infrequently in SAGN. Objective: Similar to cutaneous melanoma, CM frequently carries activating mutations in BRAF and NRAS. We studied whether CM as well as conjunctival benign and premalignant melanocytic lesions express targets in the MAP kinase (MAPK) and AKT pathways, and whether specific inhibitors affect CM growth in vitro. Method: 132 conjunctival lesions were collected from 128 patients. BRAF V600E mutation and the level of phospho-ERK and phospho-AKT was assessed by immunohistochemistry. We studied cell proliferation, phosphorylation, cell cycling and apoptosis in CM cell lines using BRAF inhibitors (Vemurafenib and Dabrafenib), MEK inhibitor (MEK162) and AKT inhibitor (MK2206). Results: BRAF V600E mutation was observed in 19 % of nevi and 26 % of melanomas, but not in primary acquired melanosis with or without atypia. Nuclear and cytoplasmic p-ERK and p-AKT were identified in all conjunctival lesions. BRAF inhibitors inhibited the cell growth of two BRAF-mutant CM cell lines, while MEK162 and MK2206 suppressed cell proliferation of all cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. Synergistic growth inhibition and increased cell death were observed in all three cell lines when MEK162 and MK2206 were combined. Conclusion: ERK and AKT are constitutively activated in conjunctival melanocytic lesions. The co-inhibitory effect of combination treatments may benefit patients suffering from metastatic conjunctival melanoma. OFP-04-007 Is chronic curcumin supplementation neuroprotective against ischemia for antioxidant activity, neurologic deficit score, or neuronal apoptosis in an experimental stroke model? S. Altinay * , M. Çabalar, C. Isler, F. Yildirim, D. S. Celik, O. Zengi, A. Tas, A. Gulcubuk Objective: To analyze whether the status of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) gene promoter methylation in glioblastoma (GBM) varies in different topographical portions, or during progression or recurrence. Method: Status of MGMT gene promoter methylation was analyzed in different topographical samples of 24 GBM, as well as in their eventual preceding low grade astrocytoma (LGA) and recurrences by Real Time PCR with AlphaReal MGMT kit. Data on immunohistochemical expression of isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 mutated protein (IDH1-R132H), p53 and Ki-67, overall survival and post-surgical treatment were available in all the cases. Results: MGMT gene promoter was homogeneously unmethylated in 13 GBMs and methylated in 8. 3/24 GBMs were heterogeneous, with MGMT promoter methylated in the inner portion of the tumour and unmethylated in the intermediate and outer portions. Conversion from unmethylated to methylated MGMT status was seen in 2/2 GBMs originated from progression of LGA. Methylation status changed in 3/12 (25 %) GBMs at recurrence. Overall survival was longer than 36 months in all patients with MGMT methylated and IDH1 mutated GBM. Conclusion: MGMT methylation status may be heterogeneous through GBM samples, and between GBM and its recurrence. Methylation may be acquired during progression from LGA and it is prognostically significant in tumours with IDH1 mutation. OFP-04-009 Adenomas of the pituitary gland: Size matters -experience of a neuropathology referral center F. Moreno * , E. Campos Costa, R. Taipa, A. Paula, M. Melo-Pires Objective: CNS Tuberosclerosis (TSC) a systemic, autosomal dominant genetic disorder is characterized by brain lesions where balloon cells can be considered as histopathological hallmarks. We purpose here the development shedule of TS lésions constitution. Method: We analysed 12 fetal and perinatal brains (from 21 GW until 3 days after birth) with TSC lesions. For each patient we considered: 1) the type of cell lesion 2) their nature (using both glial and neuronal markers) 3) their cytoarchitectural and 3) spatial organization. Results: We identified 3 types of TSC Cells (b cells, balloon cells (BC) and dysplastic giant neurons (DN) and 3 types of cytoarchitectonics (A and B cocards, cortical tubers). Cells were characterized using neuronal and glial markers. While b cells were exclusively neuronal, balloon cells could be both, the glial ones being proeminent and appearing earlier during pregnancy. DN and cortical tubers are respectively observed are observed after 25GW and 30GW. Type A cocard remained located on periventricular area while type B cocarde evolved with age and progressively occupied more superficial white matter areas. Both contained glial and neuronal BC. Cortical BC are firstly observed at 25GW on layer I, and were present in all layers after 30GW. Conclusion: Our study demonstrates that in fetal brain TSC lesions evolved progressively following distinct patterns according to their location or the TSC cell nature. Objective: To determine the prognostic value of invasive cribriform and intraductal carcinoma in pre-treatment biopsies on time to diseasespecific death. Method: We pathologically revised the diagnostic biopsies of 1031 patients from the first screening round of the European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer 1993 Cancer -2000 . The median follow-up was 13 years. Patients who either had invasive cribriform growth pattern or intraductal carcinoma were categorized as CR/IDC+. The outcome was disease-specific survival. Relationships with outcome were analyzed using multivariable Cox regression and log-rank analysis. Results: In total, 486 patients had Gleason score 6 (47 %) and 545 had ≥7 (53 %). The 15-year disease-specific-survival probabilities were 99 % in Gleason score 6 (n = 486), 94 % in CR/IDC-Gleason score ≥7 (n = 356) and 67 % in CR/IDC+ Gleason score ≥7 (n = 189). CR/IDC-Gleason score 3 + 4 = 7 patients did not have statistically different survival probabilities from those with Gleason score 6 (P = .30), while CR/IDC+ Gleason score 3 + 4 = 7 patients did (P < .001). In multivariable analysis CR/IDC+ status was independently associated with a poorer disease-specific survival (HR 2.6, 95 % CI 1.4-4.8, P = .002). We conclude that CR/ IDC+ status in prostate cancer biopsies is associated with a worse disease-specific survival. Conclusion: Our findings indicate that men with biopsy CR/IDC-Gleason score 3 + 4 = 7 prostate cancer could be candidates for active surveillance, as these patients had similar survival probabilities to those with Gleason score 6. OFP-05-002 Gleason Grade 4 prostate adenocarcinoma patterns: An interobserver agreement study among genitourinary pathologists C. Kweldam * , D. Nieboer, T. van der Kwast, G. van Leenders, G. G. 4 Subtype Collaborative Group * Erasmus Medisch Centrum, Dept. of Pathology, Rotterdam, The Netherlands Objective: To assess the inter-observer reproducibility of individual Gleason grade 4 growth patterns. Method: Twenty-three genitourinary pathologists participated in the evaluation of 60 selected high-magnification photographs. The selection included 10 cases of Gleason grade 3, 40 Gleason grade 4 (10 per growth pattern) and 10 Gleason grade 5. Participants were asked to select a single predominant Gleason grade per case (3, 4, 5) and to indicate the predominant Gleason grade 4 growth pattern if present. "Consensus" was defined as at least 80 % agreement and "favoured" as 60-80 % agreement. Results: Consensus on Gleason grading was reached in 47/60 (78 %) cases, 35 of which were assigned a grade 4. In the 13 non-consensus cases, ill-formed (6/13, 46 %) and fused (7/13, 54 %) patterns were involved in disagreement. Among the 20 cases where at least 1 pathologist assigned the ill-formed growth pattern none (0 %, 0/20) reached consensus. Consensus for fused, cribriform and glomeruloid glands was reached in 2, 23, and 38 %, respectively. In 9/35 (26 %) consensus Gleason grade 4 cases, participants disagreed on growth pattern. Six of these were characterized by large epithelial proliferations with delicate intervening fibro-vascular cores, which were alternately given fused or cribriform growth pattern ("complex fused"). Conclusion: Consensus on Gleason grade 4 growth pattern was predominantly reached on cribriform and glomeruloid patterns, but rarely on illformed and fused glands. The complex fused glands seem to be a borderline pattern of unknown prognostic significance on which a consensus could not be reached. Method: BR was considered as PSA >0.2 ng/mL. LRC was considered as being clinical stage T1c, stage pT2, needle and pathologic Gleason score <6, and preoperative PSA <10 ng/mL. Results: From a cohort of 506 consecutive RPs, 62/506 (12.3 %) patients were free of BR more than 8 years after RP (mean 10 years, range 8-14 years). From these 62 patients, 14/62 (22.6 %) had criteria for LRC. Comparing our criteria for LRC with Epstein's, the only significant discrepancy was related to PSA density. From the total of 14 patients with criteria for LRC, 9/14 (64.3 %) had PSA density >0.15. Conclusion: From a total of 62 patients without BR more than 8 years following RP, 14/62 (22.6 %) patients had criteria for LRC. These patients might have been suitable for AS instead of RP. Comparing our criteria of LRC with Epstein's criteria, a significant discrepancy was related to PSA density. The majority of patients had PSA density >0.15 and would not be enrolled for AS. OFP-05-009 DeltaNp63 is critical for progression of high grade non-muscle invasive bladder cancer through deregulation of specific genetic pathways M. Castillo-Martin * , N. Gladoun, A. Collazo-Lorduy, C. Cordon-Cardo * Fundação Champalimaud, Pathology, Lisbon, Portugal Objective: We have previously reported the significance of ΔNp63 as a protective individual marker of high grade non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (HG-NMIBC) tumour progression. The main goal of this project was to study the mechanisms by which ΔNp63 loss triggers tumour progression to muscle invasive disease. Method: We generated specific ΔNp63 Knock-down cell lines (shΔ) in RT112 and BFTC NMIBC lines and gene expression and in vitro and in vivo functional experiments were performed. Results: We observed that RT112_shΔ and BFTC_shΔ cells showed higher proliferation rate both in vitro and in vivo as well as increased colony formation activity when compared to parental cells. Furthermore, they displayed superior invasion capacity in vitro, which correlated with higher local tumour initiation and metastatic potential in the in vivo bladder orthotopic mouse model. Gene expression analyses revealed that there were nine commonly upregulated (AGR2, CAPS, CHD2, GCHFR, HOXC6, HRK, LRRC26, SORBS2 and S100A4) and four commonly downregulated (EPDR1, PPARG, SCML1 and SPOCK1) genes amongst both experimental cell lines. Functional studies to assess which genetic pathways are critical for tumour progression subsequent to ΔNp63 loss are further being pursued. Conclusion: Our findings may be able to identify high-risk patients who could benefit from early radical cystectomy to prevent tumour progression, as well as low-risk patients who could benefit from more spaced follow-up visits. Also, they may unlock the opportunity of identifying new therapeutic strategies to target previously understudied pathways in HG-NMIBC, therefore avoiding progression to more aggressive disease. OFP-05-010 Tertiary grade assessed on radical prostatectomies: Effect on prognosis using the 2016 ISUP grade group system A. Burke * , J. Cullen, W. Gesztes, H.-C. Kuo, S. Elsamanoudi, Y. Chen, S. Srivastava, I. Rosner, I. Sesterhenn * Baltimore, USA Objective: In 2016, the International Society of Urologic Pathology (ISUP) proposed a revision of the ISUP / Gleason grading system using 5 grade groups (GG), validated based on follow-up biochemical recurrence (BCR). The role of tertiary pattern was incompletely addressed. This study examined GG score, with and without tertiary grading, with odds of BCR and distant metastasis (MET). Method: Patients were enrolled in a prospective, longitudinal cohort study over 23 years. 1505 untreated carcinomas were retrospectively graded on radical prostatectomies (RP) using the 2016 ISUP GG system, with and without consideration of tertiary pattern (modified grade). Results: There were 283 BCR (19 %) and 36 MET (2.4 %) events, at a mean of 36 and 80 months post-RP, respectively. Most patients had GG2 tumours (58 %), but few had GG3 tumours (3.5 %). No GG1 patient developed MET. Two percent of unmodified GG2 and GG3 tumours, and 0.5 % of modified GG2 and GG3 developed MET (p = 0.02). GG5 tumours had a significantly higher risk for BCR (p < 0.0001), but there was no difference in unmodified GG1-GG4. Modified GG1-2, GG3-4, and GG5 separated clearly into 3 worsening prognostic groups (p < 0.0001). Conclusion: As a predictor of MET and BCR, the use of the tertiary pattern is superior to GG grading without tertiary pattern. Objective: To investigate the expression of p63 and β-catenin in urothelial bladder cancer (UBC), assess the significance of their coexpression, and evaluate their prognostic value. Method: We analyzed the expression of β-catenin and p63 by double staining immunohistochemistry in 633 cases of UBC included in tissuemicroarrays. Expression status was correlated with clinicopathological and follow-up data. Results: Low p63 expression, observed in 255 (40.3 %) tumours, was significantly associated with high grade, and pathologic stage (p < 0.001, respectively). In pT1 UBC (N = 292), p63 correlated with variant differentiation (p = 0.048). Reduced/absent β-catenin immunoreactivity (82.3 %) correlated to high grade and stage (p < 0.001, p = 0.006, respectively), and strongly correlated with impaired p63 staining (p < 0.001). Loss of both markers was linked to cancer specific death (p < 0.001, p = 0.003, respectively). High p63 was associated with better overall survival (P < 0.001), while preserved β-catenin correlated with longer recurrence-free survival (p = 0.017). Simultaneous decrease/loss of immunoreactivity of both markers was a strong predictor of poor survival (p < 0.001). In Cox regression analysis decrease of β-catenin was independent predictor of recurrence. Conclusion: Coexpression of β-catenin and p63 in UBC predicts better survival of the patients and may serve as potential prognostic tool for improvement of risk stratification and therapy decision-making in UBC, especially in early invasive bladder cancer. Results: 337 FPSS were included. 305 (91 %) FPSS showed no or minor skeletal malformations. 14 (4.2 %) FPSS had major skeletal malformations. In 18 (5.3 %) cases the diagnosis was based on the pathognomonic skeletal malformations on the FPSS. Two cases were false positive after major birth trauma. The presence of multiple skeletal malformations on prenatal ultrasound or at post-mortem external inspection was highly indicative of a diagnostic FPSS (p < 0.001). Conclusion: The majority of the babygrams/FPSS has no contribution to the diagnostic process. Multiple skeletal malformations on prenatal ultrasound or post-mortem external inspection are indicative for a diagnostic FPSS, and this should be the main selection criterion. OFP-06-005 Morphology and next-gen sequencing of six cases of lethal malignancies in giant congenital melanocytic nevi / neurocutaneous melanocytosis C. Salgado * , D. Basu, N. Marina, Y. Khakoo, C.-Y. Ho, B. Bauer, M. Objective: Peripheral neuroblastic tumours make one of the most common paediatric neoplasms, and are characterized by clinical and biological heterogeneity. Intratumoural heterogeneity is well documented in Ganglioneuroblastoma, nodular category. However little is known about "Composite Neuroblastoma" with intratumoural heterogeneity in Neuroblastoma category. Method: First, a series of 12 neuroblastomas showing morphological heterogeneity were identified by the International Neuroblastoma Pathology Committee. All of those tumours were composed of 2 clearly distinct histology areas. Then genetic intratumoural heterogeneity was analyzed by the fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method FISH performed in this study tested (1) MYCN genomic status using a MYCN probe in 2p24 and a reference DNA probe Laf (2q11), and (2) Gene rearrangements (gain) using a Dual Fusion Probe containing a mixture of two probes for PML gene (15q22) and RARA gene (17q21.1). Results: The first FISH analysis with MYCN and Laf probes demonstrated genetic difference between the two morphologically distinct components for 10 of 12 cases: namely one component showed disomy and the other had polysomy/gain. None of 24 components in this series had amplified MYCN. The second FISH analysis also demonstrated difference of 17q21.1 status between the two components for 11 of 12 cases. Overall, the two morphologically distinct areas (components) of all the 12 tumours demonstrated different genetic characteristics by the FISH tests. Conclusion: This study verified the intratumoural heterogeneity; i.e., presence of different clones, in "Composite Neuroblastoma". Those different clones in the individual tumours were first identified morphologically and then completely confirmed genetically. OFP-07-001 Exploring chromosomal abnormalities and genetic changes in uterine smooth muscle tumours B. Liegl-Atzwanger * , E. Heitzer, K. Flicker, S. Müller, P. Ulz, O. Saglam, F. Tavassoli, M. Devouassoux-Shisheboran, J. Geigl, F. Moinfar Conclusion: This study demonstrates that known FH-deletions, a recurrent molecular change in LM, occur in morphologically challenging variants of LMs, LBN and LMS. MED12 mutations are common in LM, however, occur infrequently in LBN and LMS. The genetic similarities between LBN and LMS suggest that uterine LBN and LMS are closely related and challenge the traditional concept that LBN is a tumour with just marked "degenerative" cellular changes. Our findings support the hypothesis that tumour progression within uterine smooth muscle tumours might occur. OFP-07-002 Identifying novel targetable chromosomal alterations using germline copy number variation association analysis of ovarian carcinoma H. Abdelmoneim * , N. Toni, C. Lee, S. Setlur, H. Tawfik, R. Fikry OFP-07-006 Blinded in-depth characterisation reveals distinct features associated with POLE proofreading domain mutations in endometrial cancer, facilitating clinical implementation I. van Gool * , J. Ubachs, E. Stelloo, N. Ter Haar, V. Smit, C. Creutzberg, T. Bosse * Leiden Univers. Medisch Centrum, Dept. of Pathology, The Netherlands Objective: POLE exonuclease domain mutations (EDMs) identify a subset of endometrial cancer (EC) patients with an excellent prognosis. Implementation of this biomarker has been suggested for risk refinement. To make this implementation more accessible and cost-effective, we aimed to identify histopathological characteristics to aid detection of POLE EDMs. Method: Seventy POLE mutated, 20 microsatellite unstable (MSI) endometrioid-type, 17 microsatellite stable (MSS) endometrioid-type a n d 1 9 s e r o u s E C s w e r e s e l e c t e d ( t o t a l N = 1 2 6 ) . Tw o gynaecopathologists, blinded for molecular features, evaluated each case (≥3 slides) for 15 histological characteristics. Results: POLE EDMs were associated with high grade (P < 0.01), but not with serous-like features (P = 0.336). Tumour giant cells and peritumoural lymphocytes strongly associated with POLE EDMs compared to combined MSI and MSS ECs (both P < 0.01). Compared to serous cancers, POLE EDMs contained more lymphocytes (P < 0.001) but fewer tumour giant cells (P = 0.034). A trend for POLE-mutant ECs was seen towards a pushing border invasion-type (P = 0.056). Conclusion: POLE-mutant ECs distinguish themselves from other molecular subgroups and serous cancers by a combination of endometrioid morphology, high grade, tumour giant cells and prominent immune infiltrate. Use of these histopathological features will assist pre-screening of POLE EDMs, facilitating implementation of this prognostic marker in routine pathology. OFP-07-007 Cytomorphological patterns of cervical smears of Sudanese infertile women: A case control study N. E. Husain * , E. Alsidig * Omdurman Islamic University, Dept. of Pathology, Khartoum, Sudan Objective: To identify the cytomorpholgical changes of cervical smears from infertile Sudanese women. Method: A case control study conducted in four maternity and infertility centers in Khartoum State, Sudan. Cervical smears were stained with Pap stain and the results were reported using the revised Bethesda System. Results: Out of 230 cervical smears (165 from infertile and 165 from fertile women aged 15-45 years), 22(13.33 %) of the infertile and 16 (9.69 %) of the fertile women showed abnormal epithelial changes: low grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (9/22), high grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) (7/22), atypical squamous cell of undetermined significance (3/22), atypical glandular cells (2/22), and squamous cell carcinoma (1/22) , while in the control group these types were 9, 1, 2, 3 and 1, respectively. The cervical smears from the studied infertile and fertile women showed significantly different results (P = 0.013 < 0.05). Conclusion: Cervical smears from infertile women are significantly associated with cytomorphlogical changes particularly of HSIL. The study recommends integration of cervical cancer screening programme in primary health care services. The findings in the cohort of infertile women suggest this group as a potential risk group for HSIL but this needs verification in large scale studies. Objective: Endometrial cancers (ECs) carrying POLE exonuclease domain mutations (EDMs) define an ultramutated, highly immunogenic subset of ECs with an excellent prognosis. Because it is unknown whether POLE EDMs are initiating carcinogenesis, we analysed endometrial intraepithelial neoplasias (EINs) adjacent to POLE-mutant ECs. Method: ECs with proven POLE EDMs (n = 70) were evaluated for the presence of adjacent EIN. Four EINs were identified by two independent pathologists. Of one patient, also a positive lymph node was available. DNA was isolated by microdissection and subjected to Sanger sequencing to detect the POLE mutation. One EIN was screened for CTNNB1 mutations using Sanger sequencing as this was identified in the corresponding carcinoma. Slides were immunohistochemically stained for CD8. Results: Three EINs carried the same heterozygous somatic POLE EDM as the corresponding carcinomas. In one case, the POLE EDM was also present in a positive lymph node. For one cancer containing a CTNNB1 mutation, the EIN was CTNNB1-wildtype. Both EINs and carcinomas demonstrated pronounced CD8+ lymphocytic infiltrates. Conclusion: POLE EDMs are found in precursor-and in metastatic lesions in EC. Its occurrence prior to another frequently mutated oncogene suggests POLE EDM as an early and perhaps initiating event in carcinogenesis. OFP-07-009 Molecular classification of grade 3 endometrioid endometrial carcinomas: A retrospective study E. Guerra * , A. Vidal, S. Gatius, A. Velasco, J. M. Piulats, J. Ponce, X. Gonzalez Tallada, B. Pardo, M. Gil Martín, E. Ortega, X. Matias Guiu Method: 222 HGSOC sections with known germline BRCA status were stained by in situ hybridization using a DNP-19q12 probe containing both CCNE1 and URI1, and immunohistochemistry for cyclin E1 and URI1. Results: 19q12 was amplified in 18.5 % of cases, of which 53.7 % highly expressed both cyclin E1 and URI1. There was significant correlation between 19q12 amplification and cyclin E1 (p < 0.0001) and URI (p < 0.006) expression; and between cyclin E1 and URI1 (p < 0.0001). 19q12 amplification, high cyclin E1 or URI1 high expression were each associated with poor overall survival (p = 0.028, p = 0.021, p = 0.039, respectively) and were mutually exclusive of germline BRCA1 mutations (p = 0.035, p = 0.031, p < 0.0001 respectively. Conclusion: The frequent co-occurrence of 19q12 amplification, cyclin E1 and URI1 high expression and their mutual exclusivity with BRCA1 mutations suggest that cells giving rise to this tumour type require a cooperation of a proliferative signal (cyclin E1) and a pro-survival factor (URI1) and an intact DNA repair mechanism (BRCA) in tumourigenesis. (2)evaluate their prognostic value as biomarkers; (3)assess eventual differences of ICI in HPVrelated SCC. Method: LVIN(21), HVIN(45) and SCC(44) retrospective cases from AC-Camargo-Cancer-Center, Brazil, between 1980 and 2013. H&E slides were reviewed by expert pathologists. Peri/intratumoural hotspots were evaluated. ICI characterization was accomplished by morphology and immunohistochemistry (anti-CD3/SP7, CD4/EPR685, CD8/ EP1150Y, CD20/EP459Yand FOXP3/Poly). HPV was assessed by linear array. Quantification by HSCORE of ICI was performed by APERIO® system. Statistics data were calculated considering p < 0.05. Kaplan-Meier curves were based on Log-Rank test. Results: Most ICI showed moderate/intense plasmocytes/lymphocytes count (P2L13/21-LVIN, P9L35/45-HVIN, P18L44/44-SCC). ICI showed progressively increased expression of CD3, CD8 and FOXP3 in peritumoural ICI in SCC>HVIN>LVIN (p < 0.0001). CD4 show reduced expression in SCC<HVIN<LVIN (p < 0.0001). ICI showed reduction in peri/intratumoural CD4 expression (p = 0.007/p = 0.048) and increase in intratumoural CD8 expression (p = 0.035). Conclusion: (1)ICI showed total plasmocytes and T lymphocytes count, CD8+/CD4+ ratio and FOXP3 expression progressively increased in SCC>HVIN>LVIN; (2)patients with SCC associated to intratumoural T lymphocytes and peritumoural T lymphocytes expressing FOXP3 had prolonged disease-free survival; (3)there was association between HPV and increased CD8+/CD4+ ratio intratumoural T lymphocytes in HPVrelated SCC. OFP-07-012 Uterine serous carcinomas frequently metastasize to the fallopian tube and can mimic serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma Objective: To study frequency, histopathological and immunohistochemical characteristics of tubal involvement in uterine serous carcinoma (USC) and to clarify the relationship between serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) and USC. Method: Cases of USC with complete tubal examination were prospectively collected and reviewed for presence of tubal involvement. Immunohistochemistry for p53 and WT1 was performed on endometrial and tubal components in cases with tubal involvement. Results: Of 161 USC cases, 32 (19.9 %) showed tubal involvement (unilateral: n = 19, bilateral: n = 13). Patients with tubal manifestations were older, and there were higher rates of deep myometrial and lymphovascular invasion (LVI) compared to cases without. Tubal fimbriae were involved in 16/32 cases. Tubal tumours were mucosal in 28/32, mural in 14/32, serosal in 3/32, invasive in 22/32 cases, and showed LVI in 15/32. STIC-like features were seen in 16/32 cases. Immunostaining showed complete concordance of p53 and WT1 between endometrial and tubal tumours in 23/28 cases, the majority being WT1 negative or only focally positive (19/23), and all being p53 mutant. Conclusion: Tubal involvement is detected in one-fifth of USC. Although STIC-like features might suggest tubal origin in half of these, our study shows that tubal manifestations represent intramucosal metastasis from USC in most cases. OFP-08-001 Continuous quantification of HER2 expression by microfluidic precision immunofluorescence estimates HER2 gene amplification in breast cancer D. Dupouy * , A. T. Ciftlik, M. Fiche, D. Heintze, B. Bisig, L. de Leval, M. A. M. Gijs previous day work issues. The impact of this huddle and other associated high reliability practices included (1) reduction of major frozen section (FS) discrepancy rates, (2) improved FS TAT, (3) increased QI projects across the lab, (4) increased staff engagement and (5) improvement in safety culture, manifested by improvements in 9/12 dimensions measured in a repeat survey, including 5 % improvement in overall perception of safety. Conclusion: Huddles provide a constructive, blame-free environment for respectful personal interaction that allows for dissemination of information and brief discussion, create a nidus for generating additional improvements and result in improved outcomes and increased engagement and mindfulness of the entire team. Billroth's specimen of the first gastrectomy: A modern histological and molecular analysis R. Sedivy * , E. Winter, N. Bandi, C. Druml The aim of this study is to present the results obtained in the Cyprus PCD cohort and highlight the diagnostic role of EM in the era of molecular medicine. Method: The diagnostic records of PCD patients were reviewed and data on TEM were compared with the emerging results from the recent molecular genetic tests performed in our department. Results: 30 PCD patients have been diagnosed in our centre since 1998. TEM analysis revealed a combined ODA and IDA defect in 43 % and an ODA defect in 10 % of the patients. Normal ultrastructure (NU) was identified in 34 % of the patients while the remaining presented other defects. Sixty percent of patients with NU carried a mutated DNAH11 gene and all patients with an ODA defect carried a mutated DNAH5 gene. Conclusion: Among the 30 PCD genes, only mutations in DNAH11 are associated with a NU. Mutation in other genes, such as RSPH4A (radial spokes) and CCDC164 (nexin links), cause subtle morphological defects that may missed by TEM. However, TEM remains a useful tool for PCD diagnosis as it can guide genetic testing through the identification of specific ultrastructural defects. The inclusion of pathologists in monitoring inpatient deaths significantly improves the notification procedures in cases of unnatural deaths due to medical malpractice or errors G. C. Alfsen * , H. M. Eng, G. Flaa Marum, S. Rudsro, H. Jordal, P. Wiik of death were estimated for young (<65 years) and older (>65 years) patients. Results: Overall, 3066 patients were included in this study. Histotype was different between young (<65 years) and elderly (>65 years) patients (p < 0.001). Patients over the age of 65 years were more often diagnosed with high-stage ESTS and an increasing proportion of high-grade ESTS (p < 0.001). The proportion of patients who received no treatment increased with age and the elderly received fewer combined modality treatments. Age was significantly associated with relative 5-year survival (72.7 % for younger patients and 43.8 % for the oldest elderly (>85 years)). In multivariable analysis, age still remained a significant prognostic factor. Conclusion: Different distribution of sarcoma histotypes, more highstage and high-grade sarcomas at diagnosis, less aggressive treatment and worse survival rates urge the need for optimizing sarcoma research and care of the elderly. OFP-10-002 Evident epigenetic regulation of SMARCB1 by miR-206, -381 and -671-5p in SMARCB1 immunonegative soft tissue sarcomas. miR-765 appears to be specific for epithelioid sarcoma Z. Sápi * , G. Papp, D. Mihály, Z. Mervai, C. Fletcher synovial sarcomas in 4 %, 45 dedifferentiated liposarcomas in 13 %, 5 angiosarcomas in 60 %, 10 MPNSTs in 0 % and 23 mixed sarcomas in 23 %. Expression of PDL1 showed a significant correlation with shorter patients 5-year survival (p < 0.05), higher grading (G2 vs G3, p < 0.03) and PD1 positive tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs, p < 0.001). Furthermore high PD1 in TILs (more than 3) also showed a significant correlation with shorter patients survival in high grade tumours. In RNA-Seq data high PDL1 expression of leiomyosarcomas correlated significantly with poorer patients survival (p < 0.005). Conclusion: PDL1 expression is significantly associated with shorter patients survival, grading and PD1 positive TILs. PDL1 expression might guide the use of PDL1 inhibitors in immunotherapy in soft tissue sarcomas. OFP-10-006 Intrasynovial versus extrasynovial autografts for anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: An experimental study in rabbits C. Poulios * , I. Theodoroudis, A. Boutsiadis, G. Chatziliadis, D. Kapoukranidou, K. Ditsios * Aristotle Univers. of Thessaloniki, Dept. of Pathology, Greece Objective: In the last decades there has been an increase of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) ruptures. Unfortunately ACL reconstruction using extrasynovial tendon autografts is inadequate due to poor integration. Our hypothesis is that intrasynovial tendon grafts might be more suitable in ACL reconstruction. Method: This preliminary study included 10 adult male New Zealand white rabbits, divided into two groups of 5 animals (A and B). In both groups there was an ACL reconstruction using an autologous tendon graft; extrasynovial for group A (extensors digitorum of the foot) and intrasynovial for group B (flexor digitorum profundus). The animals were sacrificed 6 weeks postoperatively and specimens from the knee were obtained for histopathological examination. The specimens were fixed in formalin, decalcified in nitrous oxide and embedded in paraffin. Results: H/E sections showed that there was better integration in group B than in group A. The integration of the graft was evaluated through the presence of incipient calcification of the tendon and the absence of necrosis or foreign-body reaction at the graft-cartilage junction. Furthermore, during the sacrifice the intrasynovial graft had better hue than the extrasynovial graft. Conclusion: Intrasynovial autografts seem to be promising for ACL reconstruction, though further research is needed. Are postmortem studies necessary in lethal cases of influenza? V. Zinserling * * University of St. Petersburg, Dept. of Pathology, Russia Objective: During the epidemics strains of influenza A virus (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) (2016) predominantly H1N1 swine) cause numerous lethal outcomes. The attention is focused upon the properties of the pathogens, epidemiological and clinical aspects. Pathological studies are rare and limited to description of lung lesions. Method: Detailed histopathological analysis of more than 300 lethal cases in children and adults during the epidemics in70th-90th, 2009, 2011, 2016 with comparison with virological data (PCR and serology) has been provided. Results: In 70th-90th with predominating H3N2 virus typical were the deaths in infants with generalized infection and in adults with destructive staphylococcal pneumonias. In 2009-2011 lethal outcomes were only in adults 18-50 years usually with obesity, mostly dyed due to diffuse alveolar damage (DAD). More severe course was in pregnant women. In 2016 we noted that majority of lethal outcomes were in adults in the age 50-80 years with obesity and chronical cardiovascular diseases. Nearby virus induced changes in lungs (cytopathic and cytoproliferative) and DAD in more than a half were bacterial superinfection and endothelium damage. Conclusion: 1) In different epidemics the age prevalence and immediate courses of death are variable. 2) Histopathological analysis is useful while discussing single patients and for understanding pathogenesis of influenza. OFP-10-008 Clinico-pathological parallels in occult viral Hepatitis B V. Zinserling * , E. Esaulenko * University of St. Petersburg, Dept. of Pathology, Russia Objective: Chronic viral hepatitis B (CVHB) in cirrhotic stage remains an important cause of death and invalidity allover the world. It has been accepted that in patients with CVHB HBsAg may constantly or occasionally not be detected in blood. Such variant of the disease was designated as occult hepatitis. In spite numerous publications concerning clinical, epidemiological and virological aspects of the problem many questions related to histopathology remain unclear. Method: In 28 autopsy cases of occult hepatitis nearby analysis of usual clinical, laboratory, macroscopical and histopathological data has been provided immunohistochemical (IHC) study with sera against HBsAg and HBcAg. Results: All the patients had typical for CVHB clinical and biochemical symptoms. Macroscopical and microscopical picture was characteristic for HVHB in cirrhotic stage. Among the histopathological findings we paid special attention to nuclear polymorphism and inclusions which are considered to typical for HVHB. In 10 cases was positive reaction with sera against HBsAg and in 5 of them HBcAg was revealed as well. In additional 7 cases we have found slightly expressed (+/−) reaction with HBsAg. Conclusion: 1) Absence of HBsAg in blood doesn't exclude death threaten course of CHVB. 2) Morphological picture of occult hepatitis is comparable with classic one. 3) Pathogenic mechanisms of the disease needs further complex studies. OFP-10-009 Characterisation of Epstein-Barr virus associated gastric carcinomas in Portugal A. Galaghar * , J. Ribeiro, C. Meireles, A. Silva, A. Oliveira, P. Pimentel-Nunes, L. P. Afonso, H. Sousa * Centro de Investigação do Instituto Português de Oncologia do Porto, Dept. de Patologica, Portugal Objective: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been detected in different subtypes of gastric carcinoma (GC) and EBV-associated gastric carcinomas (EBVaGC) are thought to account for 10 % of all cases. We intended to characterize the clinicopathological features of EBVaGCs and evaluate its impact as prognostic marker. This is the first study to characterize EBVaGC in Portugal. Method: 133 consecutive patients (81M&52F; mean age 64) submitted to gastrectomy during 2011 at IPO-Porto were evaluated. EBV presence was tested with in situ hybridization (ISH) targeting EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER-ISH). Statistical analysis was performed according to clinicopathological data. Results: EBVaGCs represent 6.8 % of all GC cases. EBV was present in 7.2 %(5/69) of tubular adenocarcinomas, 11.1 %(2/18) of mixed type and 100 %(2/2) of medullary carcinomas; EBV was absent in poorly cohesive carcinomas. EBVaGC are more frequent in gastric body and antrum. Patients with infiltrative carcinomas, lymphovascular and perineural invasion had significantly reduced survival (p < 0.001); EBVaGC patients had better survival. Conclusion: 6.8 % of GC cases are EBV-associated. Despite some similarities, our study showed different clinicopathological features when compared with previous studies, mainly the absence of EBV in poorly cohesive carcinomas. The tumour infiltrative growth pattern and the presence of lymphovascular and perineural invasion are independent predictor factors of poor survival in GC patients. OFP-10-010 EWS/FLI expression impairs adhesion and promotes motility of Ewing sarcoma cells K. Steinestel * , P. Jansen, M. Trautmann, J. Sperveslage, E. Wardelmann, C. Schaefer, U. Dirksen, W. Hartmann * Universitätsklinik Münster, Abt. Pathologie, Germany Objective: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is characterized by oncogenic fusions of the EWS gene with ETS transcription factor family genes, with EWS/FLI rearrangements representing the most common fusion (85 % of cases). ES shows early metastatic dissemination, and generalized disease is associated with poor prognosis in ES patients. It has previously been shown that expression of the EWS/FLI oncogene is associated with dysregulated actin reorganization in ES cells; however, the impact of EWS/FLI on ES cell adhesion and migration as a prerequisite for metastasis has so far not been investigated. Method: Various ES cell lines including a stably transfected EWS/FLI knock-down line were used to investigate the impact of EWS/FLI expression on cell morphology and kinase signalling in ES cells by immunofluorescence microscopy and western immunoblotting. Cell adhesion and migration assays were performed in real-time using the xCelligence platform. Results: EWS/FLI expression decreases filopodial outgrowth and cell adhesion and enhances motility of ES cells. EWS/FLI knockdown decreases mitogen-associated protein (MAP) and p70S6 Kinase signalling that have both been shown to regulate focal adhesion kinase (FAK) activity as well as protein composition of focal adhesion complexes. Conclusion: Our results indicate that EWS/FLI enhances invasive properties of ES cells via dysregulation of MAPK and p70S6K signalling, leading to altered composition and activity of focal adhesion complexes. Since both pathways are possible targets for inhibitors that are already in clinical use, the results point towards a possible role for kinase inhibitors to prevent metastatic dissemination of ES cells. OFP-10-011 Label-free imaging of infectious agents in routine histology and cytology by fluorescence lifetime Imaging (FLIM) K. Metze * , F. A. Borges da Silva, A. P. Racanelli, R. A. Trevisan Pereira * University of Campinas, Pathology, FCM, Brazil Objective: After stimulation by photons, fluorophores will remain for a short period "excited", called lifetime, and then drop to their ground state emitting fluorescence. Lifetime can be used to create virtual fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM) pictures, where the contrast is created by artificial colours attributed to different lifetime ranges. The aim of the study was to apply this technique to the detection of infectious agents in human material. Method: Fresh material or unstained cytologic or histologic preparations were examined from 30 patients with infections by toxoplasma, trypanosoma, aspergilllus, cryptococcus, enterobius, giárdia, strongyloides or schistosoma species. FLIM images were created by a confocal microscope using a pulsed laser at 405 nm, and a time-correlated single-photon counting equipment. Results: This technique showed precisely morphologic details, generally superior to that seen in usual special stains. Lifetimes of infectious agents were often different from those of human tissues thus enabeling their rapid and easy detection. Signal intensity was usually higher in fresh or formalin-fixed material than in histologic sections, due to the loss of intracytoplasmatic fluophores during the embedding process. Objective: We sought to characterize the clinicopathological features of SMARCA4-deficient thoracic sarcomas (SMARCA4-DTS), a sarcoma subtype recently identified through combined next generation and pathological screenings. Method: We retrieved 49 cases of thoracic malignancies from our consultation cases suspicious for SMARCA4-DTS (including 12 cases of the initial paper). Pathological review was performed by pathologists experts in soft tissue and thoracic pathology fields. Genomic profiling (oncoscan, Affymetrix platform) and SMARCA4 sequencing (Illumina, Miseq platform) were performed when material was available. Results: Thirty cases were finally classified as SMARCA4-deficient thoracic sarcomas. Patient's median age and survival were respectively of 42 years old and 8 months. Tumours were located in mediastinum (n = 13), mediastinopulmonary (n = 7), pleura (n = 10). Morphologically, tumours were composed of sheets of epithelioid cells dotted with vesicular monomorphic nuclei. By immunohistochemistry, they expressed consistently CD34, AE1/E3 and/or EMA and SOX2. SMARCA4 and SMARCA2 were lost in all cases. All cases displayed complex genetic profiles and SMARCA4 inactivating mutations. Differential diagnoses included SMARCA4-inactivated lung carcinoma (n = 5), midline NUT carcinoma (n = 3), SMARCB1-deficient rhabdoid tumour (n = 3), Ewinglike sarcomas with CIC rearrangement (n = 3) rhabdomyosarcoma (n = 1) and unclassified sarcoma (n = 2). Conclusion: This first clinicopathological series of SMARCA4-DTS highlights these tumours can be reliably diagnosed in routine practice. They represent aggressive malignancies which should be recognized as patients are therapeutically benefit from EZH2 inhibitors. Objective: Liquid-based fine needle aspiration (LB-FNA) is widely recognized as a reliable diagnostic method to evaluate thyroid nodules. Use of molecular biomarkers has been proposed to improve pathologic accuracy. Recently TERT promoter mutations were associated with aggressive thyroid cancers. Method: We evaluated feasibility and performance of mutation profiling of BRAF, NRAS, HRAS and TERT on residual material from LB-FNA in a prospective cohort of 649 cases including 245 atypia of undetermined significance (AUS), 219 follicular neoplasms (FN), 97 suspicious for malignancy (SM), and 88 malignant (M) . Results: Overall 159 cases (24.5 %) were mutated: 92 BRAF, 50 NRAS, 16 HRAS and 9 TERT mutations. Surgical samples were available for 319 cases. In the AUS category, 10/18 malignant cases were mutated vs Wednesday, 28 September 2016, 17.15-19.15 , Conference Room 1-2 OFP-11 Joint Session: Endocrine Pathology / Head and Neck Pathology 9/42 benign cases (p = 0.014). In the FN category, 5/16 malignant cases were mutated vs 8/104 benign cases (p = 0.016). In the SM group, 28/61 malignant samples were mutated versus 0/11 benign cases (p = 0.005). Finally in the M group, all samples were malignant with 52/67 mutated cases. Importantly TERT mutations were present in 8 cases (2 FN, 1 SM and 5 M) all confirmed to be malignant (p = 0.008). Conclusion: Mutation profiling can be successfully performed on residual material of thyroid LB-FNA and may help to improve the diagnostic accuracy of FNA. TERT mutation is rare but associated with malignancy, and as so should be systematically tested. Objective: To investigate prevalence of high risk human papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infection in sinonasal carcinomas. Method: Immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and polymerase chain reaction, detecting p16 expression and presence of HPV DNA and HPV E6/E7 mRNA, were used. Results: The study comprised 47 males and 26 females, aged 23-83 years (median 62 years). Fifty-three percent tumours arose in nasal cavity, 42 % in maxillary sinus, and 5 % within ethmoid complex. Forty-nine tumours were squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). Follow-up period ranged 1-241 months (median 19 months). A total of 18/73 (25 %) tumours were HPV-positive (17 SCCs and 1 small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma). Types HPV16, HPV18, and HPV35 were detected. There was strong correlation between HPV status and p16 expression (p < 0.005). HPVpositive SCCs occurred more frequently in smokers (p = 0.04), were more frequently p16-positive (p < 0.0001), and were non-keratinizing (p = 0.02), the latter occurring more commonly in nasal cavity (p = 0.03). Median survival for HPV-positive SCC patients was 30 months, while for HPV-negative SCC patients was 14 months (p = 0.23). Conclusion: HR-HPV are actively involved in etiopathogenesis of a subset of sinonasal SCCs. p16 may be used as surrogate marker for determination of HPV status in sinonasal carcinomas. OFP-11-003 FGFR1 is a potential prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target in head and neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) K. Koole * , D. Brunen, P. van Kempen, R. Noorlag, R. de Bree, C. Lieftink, R. van Es, R. Bernards, S. Willems * Univers. Medisch Centrum Utrecht, Dept. of Pathology, The Netherlands Objective: Targeting FGFR1 (fibroblast growth factor receptor 1) has shown to be of great therapeutic value in preclinical models of various solid tumours. In this study we have investigated the prognostic value of FGFR1 expression in HNSCC and the therapeutic relevance of targeting FGFR with AZD4547. Method: Immunohistochemistry was applied on tissue microarrays to investigate FGFR1 protein expression in 452 HNSCC. Sensitivity of HNSCC cell lines to AZD4547, either as single or combination treatment with EGFR-inhibitor gefitinib, was assessed using long-term colony formation assays, short-term viability assays, and biochemical analysis. Results: FGFR1 protein was overexpressed in 82 % of HPV-positive and 75 % of HPV-negative HNSCC. Overexpression was related to poor survival in HPV-negative HNSCC (HR: 3.07; 95 % CI: 1.74-6.90; P = 0.001). Treatment of high FGFR1 expressing cell line CCL30 with AZD4547 reduced cell proliferation and FGFR signaling. Cell lines SCC147 and BICR16 were resistant to AZD4547 treatment due to EGFR signaling. Combined AZD4547 and gefitinib treatment synergistically inhibited proliferation of resistant cell lines. Conclusion: Here we identify high FGFR1 expression as a candidate prognostic biomarker in HPV-negative HNSCC. Furthermore, we provide a rationale for treating FGFR1-expressing HNSCC with FGFR inhibitor AZD4547 and for combining AZD4547 and gefitinib in FGFR inhibitor resistant HNSCC. Objective: Assessing promoter hypermethylation of tumour suppressor genes in nasopharyngeal carcinomas (NPC) in relation to clinicopathological features. Method: Methylation status of 23 tumour suppressor genes were assessed in 108 NPCs using methylation-specific multiplex ligationdependent probe amplification. Correlation between methylation, clinicopathological features and survival were examined. Results: Hypermethylation of RASSF1A and ESR1 was significantly more frequent in EBV positive NPC, while hypermethylation of DAPK1 was more frequent in EBV negative NPC. In logistic regression RASSF1 (p = 0.049), with RASSF1 being more frequent in EBV positive NPC, remained significant. In EBV positive NPC, RASSF1A (p = 0.035) predicted worse overall survival (OS) (HR 3.044, 95 % CI 1.022-9.068, p = 0.046). In EBV negative NPCs, APC predicted worse disease-free survival (DFS) (HR 6.868, 95 % CI 2.142-22.022, p = 0.001). Conclusion: Important epigenetic differences exist between EBV negative and EBV positive NPC, with EBV negative NPCs having a more similar hypermethylation profile to other HNSCC than EBV positive NPCs. Hypermethylation of RASSF1A seems to be an independent predictor of worse OS in EBV positive NPC, and may be important in the pathogenesis of EBV infected NPC. Hypermethylation of APC may be an independent predictor of worse DFS in EBV negative NPCs. Objective: Papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) are known to have an excellent survival rate. However, it remains difficult to predict which patients need to be monitored more closely due to an increased risk of tumour relapse. Method: PTCs of 125 patients including 57 patients with an adverse outcome were immunohistochemically stained for PTEN, VEGF-A, p27, Galectin-3, HBME-1, Thyroglobulin and the Androgen Receptor. Forty-four of those tumours underwent miRNA profiling and the results were examined in the light of tall cell morphology, a phenotype known for its more aggressive behavior. Results: Univariate analysis showed a signification correlation between relapse free survival and an altered expressions for PTEN, p27, Galcetin-3, VEGF-A and Thyroglobulin. In multivariate analysis including tall cells as a confounder, only reduced expression of PTEN and an increased expression of VEGF-A correlated significantly with a shorter relapse free survival. MiR-362-3p and miR-155-5p were identified as targets for VEGF-A and miR-222-3p and miR-17-5p for PTEN. Three of these four miRNAs harbor significant prognostic patient information as well. Conclusion: PTEN and VEGF-A can predict patient outcome independent from tall cell morphology, age, stage and gender. Several identified miRNAs may be responsible for this observation. OFP-11-006 Multinodular goiter and well differentiated thyroid carcinoma in a child with embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the cervix: Another example of a DICER1 syndrome I. Gullo * , R. Batista, P. Rodrigues-Pereira, M. Bom-Sucesso, H. Barroca, P. Soares, M. Sobrinho Simoes * Centro Hospitalar de São João, Dept. of Pathology, Porto, Portugal Objective: Carriers of germline DICER1 mutations are predisposed to a rare cancer syndrome. Botryoid-type embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (bERMS), multinodular goiter (MNG) and thyroid carcinoma (TC) are emerging phenotypes. We report a case of a 12-year-old girl with the aforementioned conditions. Method: The patient underwent total thyroidectomy for bilateral, multiple nodules, detected by routine ultrasound examination. She had a bERMS of the cervix at the age of 7, treated by surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. There was a family history of thyroid pathology. Results: FNAB of two nodules revealed a colloid nodule (Bethesda II) and a follicular neoplasm (Bethesda IV). The thyroid gland was enlarged and multinodular (61 g). Besides numerous encapsulated nodules with variable degrees of cellularity and brisk mitotic activity (maximum 18/10 HPF) there was one, larger than the others (2.1 cm), displaying capsular and vascular invasion. This tumour showed nuclei of the "intermediate type" and was thus classified as Well Differentiated TC, not otherwise specified. Molecular testing for BRAF, NRAS and TERT promoter did not reveal any mutation. Conclusion: This case demonstrates the malignant potential of MNG in the setting of DICER1 syndrome and highlights the need to understand this peculiar carcinogenic process that does not fit with the classic division in papillary and follicular TC. Objective: To correlate the mutational profile with clinical and pathological characteristics in adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC). Method: Targeted next-generation sequencing and copy number variation (CNV) analyses for 18 genes most frequently altered in ACC were performed in a series of 62 cases (including 10 with matched primary and metastatic/recurrence samples) and correlated with major clinical and pathological characteristics of tumours. Results: A total of 433 somatic deleterious genetic alterations (328 gene mutations and 105 CNV) were identified in 57/62 cases, the remaining five being wild-type for all genes tested. TERT, CDK4, ZNRF3 and RB1 were altered in more than 30 % of cases. The genotype was significantly different among histological variants, with the lowest mutation burden in the oncocytic one (p = 0.006) and the highest prevalence of RB1 (p = 0.001) and CDK4 (p = 0.002) in the conventional and myxoid ones, respectively. None of the 10 cases with matched samples showed a stable genotype along tumour progression. Among individual genes, TP53 mutations were associated with high Ki-67 index, high tumour stage and aggressive disease status (all p < 0.02). Conclusion: The genomic signature in ACC is unstable along tumour progression and differs among histological variants; moreover, TP53 mutations represent the most relevant prognostic molecular marker. OFP-11-008 High miR-100a expression is associated with aggressive features and decreased response to mTOR inhibitors in lung carcinoids I. Rapa * , A. Vorra, G. Gatti, S. Izzo, J. Giorcelli, N. Lo Buono, S. Vatrano, F. Napoli, M. Papotti, M. Volante * University of Turin, Dept. of Oncology, Orbassano, Italy Objective: To analyze in vitro and in vivo the expression and the functional role of miR-100a in lung carcinoids, as an alternative mechanism targeting mTOR pathway. Method: miR-100a expression was analyzed by means of real-time PCR in 92 lung carcinoids and compared with mTOR mRNA expression, as well as with major clinical and pathological parameters. In vivo, the effect of miR-100a silencing on the responsiveness to mTOR inhibitors was assessed in typical carcinoid H727 cells. Results: miR-100a was inversely correlated with mTOR mRNA expression (p < 0.0001), supporting its effect in the negative regulation of mTOR pathway in lung carcinoids, in vivo. Moreover, high miR-100a expression was associated with aggressive features (atypical histotype, high clinical stage, vascular invasion and aggressive disease status; all p < 0.05) and with shorter survival at univariate analysis (HR 4.5, p = 0.013). Silencing of miR-100a in H727 cells significantly increased mTOR mRNA expression and sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors, in vitro. Conclusion: miR-100a actively participates to the regulation of mTOR expression in vivo and in vitro, and represents a novel candidate prognostic biomarker in lung carcinoids; moreover, repression of its expression is associated to increased responsiveness to mTOR inhibitors and might represent a novel tool to sensitize lung carcinoid cells to these target agents. Objective: The diagnosis of spindle cell squamous carcinoma (SCSC) of the larynx is challenging, because the conventional SCSC component, may be limited and difficult to recognize. Infact lesions with a prominent inflammatory infiltrate and reactive vessels, may have a granulation tissue-like appearance, like post-intubation granulomas or inflammatory pseudotumours. We analysed the clinico-pathological features of a group of laryngeal SCSC with granulation tissue-like appearance. Method: All cases of SCSC between 1996 and 2015 were reviewed and tumours with a inflammatory infiltrate and abundant capillary vessels were selected. Immunohistochemistry for cytokeratins AE1/AE3, CAM5.2 and 5/6, as well as for p63, p40 and ALK1 were performed. Ten cases of true granulation tissue were controls. Results: Five cases of granulation tissue-like SCSC were identified. Patients were males, 57-65 years. All lesions consisted of a ulcerated polypoid proliferation of atypical spindle cells, with a minor component of conventional invasive or in situ squamous carcinoma. The spindle cells expressed AE1/AE3 or CAM5.2, while cytokeratin 5/6, p63 and p40 were positive only in the conventional squamous component. ALK1 was negative. Conclusion: The diagnosis of granulation tissue-like SCSC is challenging due to the clinical and histological overlap with benign conditions. The use of an immunohistochemical panel is recommended. OFP-11-011 Epithelioid osteosarcoma of the maxilla: Review of a rare and agressive variant C. Peña Barreno * , I. Lara Sanz, A. Berjón, J. J. Pozo-Kreilinger, E. Ruíz-Bravo * Tres Cantos, Spain Objective: To analyse clinical, histologic and immunohistochemical features of epithelioid osteosarcoma which develops in the maxilla. Method: 434 patients were diagnosed with osteosarcoma from 1966 to 2015 in Hospital La Paz. Only five were epithelioid variant, three of which were located in the jaw. The two remaining cases were in the humerus and femur. Data regarding the objective were obtained from medical and pathological records. Results: All patients were female with a mean age of 36 years (range, 21-56) . Microscopically, the tumour was composed of large epithelioid cells with prominent nucleolus and scattered giant multinucleated cells. The predominant growth pattern was sheet-like. Cord, rosette-like structures and hemangiopericitoid pattern were also observed. Osteoid was found. Cytokeratins were negative. Despite treatment with systemic chemotherapy and surgery the disease progressed and the patients died. Conclusion: Epithelioid osteosarcoma is a rare aggressive variant. Differential diagnosis includes small cell-type osteosarcoma, metastatic neuroblastoma, PNET, metastatic carcinoma and malignant neoplasias with epithelioid characteristics. The osteoid formation by neoplastic cells is the most important key. The usual treatment consists in preoperative chemotherapy followed by surgery. It has been predominantly reported in the long bones of young people and only few cases have been reported in the jawbones, therefore more studies are required. Human papillomavirus-related carcinoma with adenoid cystic-like features: Characterization of the Danish material S. Andreasen * , K. Kiss * Rigshospitalet, Otolaryngology Head & Neck, Copenhagen, Denmark Objective: Human papillomavirus-associated carcinoma with adenoid cystic-like features (HPV-related ACC-like carcinoma) is a recently described entity of the sinonasal tract. Only 9 cases have been reported worldwide, and information on the clinicopathologic features and prognosis are warranted. We set out to investigate the prevalence, clinicopathologic features, and outcome of these patients in the Danish national material. Method: Morphological mimics of HPV-related ACC-like carcinoma from the sinonasal tract were collected from Danish pathology departments from 1990 to 2015 and histopathologically reviewed. HPV screening was performed with PCR using GP5+/6+ primers. Positive cases were g e n o t y p e d b y s e q u e n c i n g a n d i n s i t u h y b r i d i z a t i o n . Immunohistochemistry was used for evaluating p16 status and morphological characterization. Results: Seven HPV-related ACC-like carcinoma cases were identified: 5 in the nasal cavity, 2 in the paranasal sinuses. Four were female and 3 were male. One case was treated 20 years previously and experienced a local recurrence after 11 years. This patient has now remained recurrencefree for 9 years. All remaining cases were diagnosed in 2012 or later with no recurrences. One case harbored HPV-16, 2 cases HPV-33, 2 cases HPV-35, 1 case HPV-56 and 1 case HPV-68. Conclusion: We present a large material of this newly described, rare tumour of the sinonasal tract. The incidence seems to have risen dramatically through recent years, paralleling what is seen for HPV-positive oropharyngeal SCC. Only one case had long-term follow-up, and this patient experienced a local recurrence. However, the prognosis seems more favorable than for other sinonasal malignancies. Tumour initiating cells of the follicular lymphoma T. Yoshino * , K. Takata, T. Takata * University of Okayama, Dept. of Pathology, Japan Objective: Follicular lymphoma (FL) is an indolent lymphoma but rather frequently recurs. It is very important to know its tumour initiating cells (TIC) and we sought to find the TIC of FL. Method: We examined immunohistology, response to anti-cancer drugs, transplantablity. Results: TRA-1-60 positive cells were found in non-neoplastic germinal centers, which may be related to reprogamming by AID. TIC of FL recognized by TRA-1-60 were located mainly at interfollicular area, and stayed next to vessels"Niche". They were positive for CD20 and with t(14;18) and negative for Ki67. In surgically resected samples, TRA-1-60 positive cells increased in number at the recurrence after chemo-therapy with rituximab. Unexpectedly, TRA-1-60-positive population was increased in number resistant to rituximab-treatment. TRA-1-60-positive cells showed high level of drug resistant gene. TRA-1-60 positive tumour initiating cells highly frequently form transplantable tumours in NOD-SCID mice, and the size of the transplanted cells was much larger than TRA-negative population. Conclusion: We strongly believe TRA-1-60-positive cells of FL are tumour-initiating cells, which is crucial to get the best therapeutic way. As far as I know, this is the first report of TIC of FL. OFP-12-002 Diagnostics of splenic diffuse red pulp B-cell lymphoma A. Kovrigina * , S. Korzhova, L. Al-Radi, I. Jakutic, U. Julhakyan, A. Sudarikov CD5, CD20, CD23, CD25, CD27, CD76 (DBA.44), CD103, CD123, TRaP, Annexin1, cyclin D1. Mutational analysis of BRAF (exon 11 and 15), MAP2K1 (exons 2-3, 11), NOTCH1 was performed by Sanger sequencing. Tumour DNA was obtained from frozen tissues. Results: Splenic B-cell lymphoma was diagnosed in 71/87 (81,6 %) pts, predominantly SMZL (70 %). 5/71 cases (ratio m:f 1:1.5; median age 55 years, normal or high level leukocytosis) were characterized by similar splenic morphology and heterogeneous expression of CD11c, TRaP, CD103, CD123 without expression CD25, CD27, Cyclin D1, Annexin1. In 4/5 cases predominantly intravascular CD20+ lymphoid infiltrates in BMB were revealed. Using cytology nucleoli were invisible, the number of villous lymphocytes ranged 12-60 %. MutBRAF V600E or NOTCH1 were not found. Sequencing MAP2К1 showed the presence of activating mutations of the gene G128D MAP2К1 in one patients Conclusion: SDRPL was diagnosed in 7 % of splenic B-cell lymphomas (2013) (2014) (2015) . Using molecular study for BRAF, MAP2K1, NOTCH sustainable mutations have not been identified. OFP-12-003 Functional single nucleotide polymorphisms in IL2 and IL10 alter predisposition to mantle cell lymphoma, as well as its progression and imune antitumour response G. Mendonça * , R. Rocha, R. Secolin, S. Nonogaki, M. Delamain, A. Alves, G. Colleoni, F. Soares, C. Souza, C. Lima, J. Vassallo * Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil Objective: To assess mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) tumour-host interaction dependent on IL2 and IL10 by genotyping functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to evaluate risk for tumour onset, prognosis and cellular microenvironment composition. Method: We selected 100 consecutive patients with MCL and 151 blood donors as controls. Genotyping for rs2069762, rs6822844 (IL2), rs1800872, rs1800890 and rs3024491 (IL10) was performed using Taqman® Openarray® technology. Paraffin-embedded tumour tissue was submitted to immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CD68, CD163, iNOS, FOXP3, IL2 and IL10. Slides were analyzed using the Aperio® system. Results: A higher frequency of IL10 AGA haplotype was found in MCL patients as compared to controls (p = 0.06 after correction for multiple comparisons). AA genotypes of both rs2069762 and rs3024491 were independently associated with unfavorable overall (p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively) and event-free survivals (p = 0.03 and p = 0.06, respectively). Patients carrying rs3024491 AA genotype showed increased levels of FOXP3 (p = 0.06) and iNOS-positive macrophages (p = 0.01) in tumour biopsies. Neither IL2 nor IL10 expression seemed modulated by the respective SNPs. Conclusion: Our data suggest that a 3-SNP haplotype in IL10 might predispose to MCL. Moreover, the AA genotype of rs3024491 may increase T-reg lymphocyte and cytotoxic macrophage levels in MCL. Finally, both rs3024491 and rs6822844 are independently associated with unfavorable prognosis in this lymphoma. OFP-12-004 AIDS related Non Hodgkins lymphomas: A report on 320 cases from single institution addressing gray zones in diagnosis T. Shet * , M. Sengar, S. Epari, S. Sawant, H. Jain, S. Laskar, H. Menon, S. Gujral, A. Alahari * Tata Memorial Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Mumbai, India Objective: AIDS related lymphomas (ARL) form a unique and interesting spectrum of tumours. Not many papers have highlighted the gray zones in diagnosis given the uncommon nature of the disease. Method: This study on 320 ARL focused on evaluating these tumours using a wide panel of antibodies and attempting to segregate the clear from unclear tumours or gray zone areas. Results: Of the 320, 122 were diffuse large B cell lymphoma(DLBL), 152 Plasmablastic lymphoma(PL) and 46 Burkitt lymphoma. There were no T cell lymphomas during the study period. In 308 cases detailed immunohistochemistry could be performed after which there were 102 DLBL, 129 PL, 42 BL and 35 tumours were gray zone cases. The gray zone areas included a gray zone between DLBL/BL(4), tumours that expressed markers like plasmablastic lymphoma but morphologically were Burkitt's lymphoma (Blastic BL/PL. 7), large B cell lymphomas that expressed markers like PL but were morphologically DLBL (14) , and unclassifiable lymphomas that expressed only LCA(10). When stratified by original diagnosis PL Showed poor OAS/ overall survival but using the revised definition a significant better survival of PL as compared to the gray zone cases was seen(p -0.013). Amongst other factors affecting OAS were CD4 counts (p -0.0001), site of disease(p -0.006)), HAART therapy (0.0001) and type of chemotherapy. Conclusion: Gray zones exists in ARL and there is tendency to overcall PL and the gray zone entities need to be weeded out for better patient management. OFP-12-005 Stathmin-1, a marker of problematic cases in folicular lymphoma S. Akturk * , G. Kaygusuz, H. Kivrak, S. K. Köse, Y. Sahin, I. Kuzu * Ankara University, Pathology, Turkey Objective: The aim of this study was to assess stathmin-1 status, its correlation with clinicopathological parameters and with 1p36 gene rearrangement, and its role as a diagnostic marker in follicular lymphoma. Method: This study included 81 follicular lymphoma cases. Stathmin 1 was evaluated by immunohistochemistry on tumour tissue macroarrays. Besides, 1p36, bcl-2, bcl-6, IgH gene rearrangement by FISH analysis was performed. Results: Stathmin 1 expression was detected in 88,9 % of cases. There was a positive correlation between the histologic grade and Stathmin 1 positivity (p = 0.001, Chi-Square test). All BCL2-cases (n = 13) were positive for Stathmin 1 whereas, 8/9 of CD10-cases were positively stained. FISH analyses are pending. Conclusion: We showed that Stathmin 1 was helpful in detecting BCL2and CD10-follicular lymphomas, and it could be a novel diagnostic marker for those problematic cases. Objective: The aim of the study is to determine the incidence& prognostic impact of ASXL1 mutations and protein expression in myeloid stem cell diseases with concurrent bone marrow fibrosis. Method: The bone marrow aspirations&biopsies of 84 adult patients diagnosed as MDS-F, MDS/MPN-F and PMF-SF at Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Pathology Department between the years 2008-2013 were included in the study. Patients were evaluated according to clinicomorphological parameters& ASXL1 mutations/protein expression and their prognostic value were investigated. Results: Immunohistochemistry(IHC) was found to be concordant with s e q u e n c i n g i n t e r m s o f d e t e c t i n g n o n s e n s e m u t a t i o n s (100%sensitivity&specifity). ASXL1 mutations/protein expression shorten the OS and were significantly associated with male gender, anemia, high blast count, dysplasia in ≥2 lineages, increase in stromal plasma cells and leukemic transformation, but not correlated with fibrosis. This is the first study investigating the associations between ASXL1 mutations/ protein expression and morphological parameters and comparing the ASXL1 mutational status and protein expression. Two nonsense, 5 missense unannotated mutations and 2 novel genetic alterations on 3'UTR have been discovered. Conclusion: The algorithm to be chosen to detect the ASXL1 mutational status could be screening the protein expression by IHC and if score 2/3 staining is observed, molecular method could be performed to define the specific mutation. Objective: Enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma type 1 (EATL) is a leading cause of mortality in adult-onset coeliac disease. While miRNA expression has been investigated in other T-cell lymphomas, the objective of this pilot study is to elucidate the miRNA signature of EATL. Method: A search of the laboratory information system of two universityaffiliated hospitals was carried out to identify cases of EATL over a 14-year period (2000-2014) . Available histological and molecular features were reviewed by two histopathologists. An extensive meta-analysis of miRNA associated with T-cell lymphoma and T-cell function was carried out and a shortlist of 95 miRNAs was created. RNAwas extracted and quantified from 20 paraffin-embedded samples (10 EATL and 10 controls, comprising 5 samples of small bowel without enteropathy and 5 samples with coeliac disease), and assays were run, using customised TLDA cards. Statistically significant miRs were identified, using a t-test on R bio conductor software. Results: Findings included identifying an increase in the expression of vertebrate-specific miRNAs, miR-196a and miR196b. An eight-fold increase in the expression of miR-127, known to be associated with the regulation of genes involved in apoptosis, was identified. An eight-fold reduction in the expression of miR-141 was identified. Conclusion: This pilot study has identified candidate miRNAs potentially involved in the pathogenesis of EATL. OFP-12-008 Label-free imaging of routine bone marrow smears by autofluorescence permits identification of erythroid precursors in human bone marrow K. Metze * , A. P. Racanelli, F. A. Borges da Silva, I. Lorand-Metze * University of Campinas, Pathology, FCM, Brazil Objective: Fluorescence lifetime imaging (FLIM) creates images by measuring the delay of the fluorescence photon emission at each image pixel reflecting differences in molecular structures and their physicochemical environment. We investigated the utility of this technique for diagnosis in routine bone marrow (BM) smears. Method: We used unstained BM smears: 13 normal, 10 acute myeloid leukemias, 5 megaloblastic anemias, 3 acute erythroid leukemias and 2 sideroblastic anemias. Images were captured with a confocal microscope and a HPM-100-40-Hybrid detector, with an excitation at 405 nm (diode laser,80 MHz). Images were compared with May-Grünwald-Giemsa (MGG) stained smears. Results: We obtained highly contrasted FLIM images. Different cell types could be easily recognized by their similarity with MGG images. Erythrocytes exhibited short lifetimes (hemoglobin component) with similar values in all groups except for those with sideroblastic anemia. Nuclear lifetimes were higher than those of cytoplasm, which showed intermediate values, similar to the protein background. Nuclei and cytoplasm of granulopoetic precursors had values considerably higher than those of erythroblasts. Conclusion: The FLIM technique was easily applicable on routine smears without stain. The images had good quality permitting cell identification. FLIM values allowed to distinguish different lineages of cells thus suggesting relevant physicochemical differences of the nuclear and cytoplasmic organization. OFP-12-009 Bone marrow histopathology in patients with myelofibrosis following allogeneic stem cell transplantation: Single institution experience V. Baykov * , A. Botina, M. Barabanshikova, E. Morozova, B. Afanasyev * St Petersburg 1st Medical Univ., Pathology, Russia Objective: To assess hematopoietic reconstitution and regression of bone marrow (BM) fibrosis in patients with myelofibrisis (MF) following allogeneic stem cell transplantation (alloHSCT). Method: At our institution 12 pts were treated with alloHSCT for MF between 2012 and 2015, in 7 cases BM trephines at diagnosis and at follow-up (days +40 ± 10 and +100 ± 10) were available. These pts were aged 36-57 years. 5 pts had primary MF, 1 -post-PV MF, 1 -post-ET MF. 3/6 were JAK-2+, 1/2 were CALR+. 6 pts are alive in remission at the present time with median follow-up 13 months, one patient died from graft failure and infectious complications. Bone marrow samples were fixed in 10 % buffered formalin, decalcified in EDTA and processed routinely. H&E, Giemsa and Gomori stains were done. Results: At diagnosis all pts showed features of corresponding myeloproliferative neoplasm with severe MF, consistent with grade 2-3 according to European consensus approach. At day +40 MF was reduced by 1 grade, and at day +100 5 of 7 pts showed MF grade 0-1 with restoration of normal BM architecture. Conclusion: AlloHSCT is an effective treatment modality for myelofibrosis. By day +100 we observed restoration of normal BM architecture with MF0-1 in 5 of 7 pts included in the study. Objective: Myeloid sarcoma (MS) is a tumour mass consisting of myeloid blasts presenting at an anatomical site other than the bone marrow (BM). It can be seen de novo or in association with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), myeloproliferative neoplasias (MPN), or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) . The aim of this study was to evaluate the presenting features, morphological and immunohistochemical features of MS cases diagnosed in our institution, in view of the literature. Method: We searched the medical records of our institution for the patients diagnosed as MS between 1999 and 2015. Fourty cases were found and reevaluated. Results: Median age was 37.9 years (range: 5 months-84 years); 26 were male, 14 were female. The most commonly involved sites were the lymph nodes, soft tissue, bone, and skin. Immunohistochemically, CD68-KP1 was the most commonly expressed marker (31/34; 91 %), followed by CD33 (7/9; 77.7 %), MPO (25/36; 69.4 %) , CD117 (18/28; 64 %), lysozyme (18/ 29; 62 %), CD68-PGM1 (2/4, 50 %), and CD34 (12/33; 36.3 %). BM examination revealed AML in 13 cases (only five cases manifested with preceding or coincidental AML); MPN or MDS in 11 cases, and none were found in 9 cases. Four cases showed central nervous system involvement in cerebrospinal fluid. Three cases manifested in multiple sites. Conclusion: MS is a rare extra-medullary tumour mass composed of immature myeloid cells. It may present with variable morphological and phenotypic features in addition to pathological diagnostic challenges. Extensive immunohistochemical panel may be necessary for accurate differential diagnosis which is critical for appropriate therapy. Objective: To determine the accuracy of fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) complemented by flow cytometry (FC) for the diagnosis of lymphoid lesions. Method: Consecutive 252 FNACs of lymphoid lesions studied with complementary FC, over a period of 10 years, were retrieved from our files and correlated with histology and/or clinical follow-up if available. FC was performed with the following antibodies in a panel: CD45, CD19, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD5, CD10, CD23, FMC-7, Kappa and Lambda chains. Results: 198/252 (78, 6 %) FNACs were diagnosed as reactive, 32/252 (12,7 %) as aberrant phenotypic trait (suspicious), 20/252 (7,9 %) as malignant and 2/252 (0,8 %) as inconclusive. The results of histological examination were available in 18/20 malignant lesions, in 23/32 suspicious cases, in the 2 inconclusive cases and in 28/198 reactive cases. 16/ 18 (88,9 %) malignant lesions, the 2 (100 %) inconclusive cases and 10/ 23 (43,5 %) suspicious cases were diagnosed as malignant. In 23/28 (82,1 %) reactive cytological cases, a benign process was diagnosed by histology. Correlation with histology showed a sensitivity of 86 % and a specificity of 90 %. Conclusion: FC is an important additional tool in the cytological diagnosis of lymphoproliferative disorders, being the combined approach a useful technique for distinguishing reactive lymphoid proliferations from malignant lymphomas. OFP-13-001 Preoperative detection of circulating epithelial cells in non-neoplastic pulmonary pathology. Pitfalls and limits of the CellSearch method E. Denis * , E. Long, V. Hofman, E. Selva, M. Ilié, P. Hofman * CHU Pasteur, Pathology, Nice, France Objective: The detection of circulating "tumour" cells (CTCs) by the CellSearch (CS) system is the only method approved by the FDA for the follow-up of patients with metastatic breast, prostate or colon cancer. The CS assay uses anti-EpCAM ferrofluid magnetic particles to capture and anti-CK8/18/19 to visualize CTCs. This approach entails potentially false negatives given the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in some CTCs. The absence of cytopathological criteria on isolated cells does not assert their tumour nature. We evaluated the CS specificity in patients with non-neoplastic lung disease. Method: The CS analysis was performed in 37 patients before surgery for non-tumoural thoracic pathology: infectious diseases [tuberculosis (n = 6); actinomycosis (n = 1), aspergillosis (n = 2), abscess (n = 3); bronchopneumonia (n = 2)], inflammatory and degenerative diseases (n = 15); and various other thoracic nontumoural diseases (n = 8). Results: 5/36 (14 %) patients had at least 2 epithelial cells detected by the CS method. One patient had prior history cancer but progression was not observed. No patient developed cancer pathology after 6 years of clinical follow-up. Conclusion: CS technique can detect non-tumoural epithelial cells and gives false positive results of CTCs. "CTCs" terminology may seem overused when reporting results. The lack of precise cytomorphological criteria with the CS method is a strong limit to this technology. OFP-13-002 Sphingosine kinase 1 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung adenocarcinoma P. Fouret * , L. Castelain, H. Le Stunff * Pitié-Salpêtrière (APHP), Dept. de Pathologie, Paris, France Objective: To uncover copy-number deregulated genes that drive phenotypes in lung cancer. Method: An integrated analysis of copy-number aberrations and gene expression profiles in 105 lung adenocarcinomas was used to uncover genes associated with coordinated gene expression profiles. Gene expression levels were validated by qPCR. Gene products were localized by Immunolabeling in tumour tissues. Results: Sphingosine-kinase 1 (SphK1) was overexpressed in cases with gains of 17q compared to cases with diploid 17q (p < 0.05). SphK1 overexpression correlated with a signature that overlapped with the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) hallmark signature (q value 1 E-67, GSEA, Broad Institute). Genes in the SphK1-associated signature included EMT inducers (SNAI1, SNAI2 and TWIST1), many collagens and fibroblast activation genes (FAP, POSTN). Using monoclonal antibodies that reacted specifically with SphK1 or SNAI2-the EMT inducer that most strongly correlated with SPHK1 expression -, we could localize the proteins to tumour cells. These results were confirmed by showing the localization of SphK1 or SNAI2 to cells overexpressing TP53. Conclusion: Deregulated SphK1 in tumour cells was associated with 17q gains and an EMT signature in lung adenocarcinomas. This suggests that overexpression of SphK1 in tumour cells can contribute to an EMT in lung cancers. Objective: Expression of PD-L1 in tumour and immune-cells has demonstrated predictive value to atezolizumab treatment in NSCLC patients1, and emerged as a promising biomarker for the selection of patients to cancer immunotherapies. Given the difficulty in obtaining tissue for biomarker assessment in NSCLC, we investigated the utility of circulating tumour cells (CTCs) as a non-invasive method to evaluate PD-L1 status in advanced NSCLC patients. Method: CTCs were enriched from peripheral blood samples from 80 NSCLC patients (ISET platform, Rarecells) . PD-L1 expression in CTCs and matched-tumour-tissue was evaluated by IHC (SP142, Ventana), and quantified in tumour and white blood cells. Results: CTCs ranged from 2 to 268 CTCs/4 ml, with median 65 CTCs/4 ml. 6 patients (7.5 %) showed ≥1 PDL-1 positive CTC, and 16 patients (20 %) showed >1 % PDL-1 positive tumour cells in tissue with 93 % concordance between tissue and CTCs. 46 patients (58 %) showed >1 % PDL-1 positive immune infiltrates in tissue, and 39 patients (49 %) showed >1 % PDL-1 positive in circulating WBC, with 80 % concordance between blood and tissue. Conclusion: PD-L1 status in CTCs and WBCs correlated well with PD-L1 status in tissue, revealing the potential of CTCs as a non-invasive realtime biopsy to evaluate PDL-1 expression in NSCLC. Objective: ΔNp63/p40-positive resected SCC of the lung (n = 101) were analyzed for FGFR1 gene amplification and driver-mutations in FGFR2/ 3 genes to investigate their prognostic value. Method: FISH-analysis was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissues. For the detection of K660N/K660E (FGFR2) and R248C/ S249C (FGFR3) mutations, tumour DNA was sequenced by Sanger sequencing. Results: Twenty-two of 101 (22 %) samples were amplification positive based on a FGFR1/CEN8 ratio 2.0 or higher. In advanced stages (III-IV), patients carrying the amplification showed significantly longer overall survival (p = 0,006). Among women, amplification was significantly associated with longer overall survival (p = 0,023). The FGFR1 gene amplification status was associated with younger patient age (65 versus 69 years, p = 0,046); there was no association with gender, tumour stage, histologic subtype, tumour grade or ΔNp63/p40-immunoreactivity. In one out of 101 cases (1 %) the S249C mutation was identified, there was no indication that it influences overall survival; the K600N, K660E or R248C mutations were not identified. Conclusion: In SCC of the lung, FGFR1 gene amplification is a frequent genetic alteration whereas K660N/K660E (FGFR2) and R249C/S249C (FGFR3) are rare events. In SCC of the lung, FGFR1 gene amplification appears not to be a negative but rather a favorable prognostic factor for women and particularly for patients with advanced tumours. End-stage sarcoidosis: Radiologic-pathologic correlation A. Khoor * , J. Phelan, C. Keller, T. Colby, K. Leslie, A. Lee * Mayo Clinic, Dept. of Pathology, Jacksonville, USA Objective: To correlate radiologic and pathologic findings in patients who received lung allografts for a clinical diagnosis of end-stage sarcoidosis. Method: From 2001 to 2016, 20 patients (4 % of our total) were transplanted for presumed end-stage pulmonary sarcoidosis. Pretransplant high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) images of the chest were reviewed by a thoracic radiologist. The explants were reviewed for the type of fibrosis and the presence of granulomas. Results: The HRCT opinions were as follows: likely sarcoidosis, likely usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP), and other. The "likely sarcoidosis" HRCT category (15 cases) histologically corresponded to sarcoid type fibrosis with granulomas in 11 cases and without granulomas in 4 cases. The "likely UIP" HRCT category (4 cases) histologically corresponded to UIP pattern in 3 cases and sarcoid type fibrosis with granulomas in 1 case. Multidisciplinary discussion concerning these latter cases resulted in a diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) in 3 cases and sarcoidosis in 1 case, respectively. Finally, "other" HRCT findings (1 case) represented sarcoidosis-related pulmonary veno-occlusive disease histologically. Conclusion: (1) End-stage sarcoidosis may lack granulomas. (2) Patients presumed to have end-stage sarcoidosis may show UIP pattern. This may be due to the development of IPF in a patient with a clinical history of sarcoidosis. Objective: To study morphological features of pulmonary embolism. Method: Autopsy examination. Results: 2926 autopsies served as the material for the analysis (1568 men-48.1 %, 1358 women-51.9 %), which were obtained from postmortem studies in Moscow and Ryazan. Among the sources of all thromboembolic complications by frequency of occurrence in the first place are the veins (venous sinuses) of crus and thigh (femoral popliteal-iliac-segment) (50.1 % of both men and women), in the second-the right heart cavity (18.7 %). Other separate systems of vena cava inferior (pelvic, hemorrhoidal, hepatic veins and vena cava inferior itself) were the source of thrombosis in 9.8 %. With genetically determined factors the state of thrombophilia is associated, clinical implementation of which is induced by external influences. Acquired factors predisposing to thrombosis are many conditions that can be grouped by the pathogenetic principle: activation of coagulation factors and fibrinolysis violation; pathology of platelets; deceleration and/or blood flow disturbance; changes in blood rheology; damage to the endothelium and vascular wall; drug therapy. For example, thrombin increases the expression of cell adhesion molecules. Also, we can indicate that the thromboembolic process is associated with the expression of cell adhesion molecules such as P-selectin, ICAM-1 (CD54) and VCAM-1 (CD106). Conclusion: At this level of study leading factor in this pathology is mechanical obstruction of the pulmonary arterial system. Pathologic picture of death by pulmonary embolism is made by complex of pathological changes. The main of them is the presence of thromboembolism in the gaps of pulmonary trunk system, the second-the source of thromboembolism, the third-the macro and / or microscopic reactive changes. OFP-13-007 Association of Type V collagen regulated genes and isoforms chains with systemic sclerosis-related pulmonary fibrosis W. Rosolia Teodoro * , I. Begalli, A. P. Pereira Velosa, P. Martin, S. Carrasco, A. Ab'Saber, E. Roger Parra, V. Capelozzi * Universidade de São Paulo, Medical School, Dept. of Rheumatology, Brazil Objective: Type V collagen (COLV) can be a possible trigger involved in the pathogenesis in early stages of systemic sclerosis (SSc). This study aimed to analyze morphological and molecular features of α1(V) and α2(V) chains and the role of COL5A1, COL5A2 gene expression in fibrillogenesis in a cohort of patients with early SSc-related pulmonary fibrosis. Method: Pulmonary biopsies were obtained from 7 patients with SScrelated fibrosis and 7 healthy controls. Morphometry, immunofluorescence and qPCR were performed to characterize microscopic changes of α1(V) and α2(V) protein and levels of RNA COL5A1, COL5A2. Results: Lung immunofluorescence and qPCR data distinguished patients with SSc-related pulmonary fibrosis from healthy controls. In lungs of patients with SSc-related fibrosis who had abnormal histoarchitecture, immunofluorescence confirmed increased markers of α1(V) protein around the alveolar septa and capillaries resulting in a fine net pattern on collapsed areas and overexpression of α2(V) in capillaries and vessels. qPCR revealed increased COL5A1 and COL5A2. Conclusion: These results highlight major pathogenic pathways relevant to lung in SSc-related fibrosis suggesting that a post-translational modification of α1(V) chain and up-regulated expression of COL5A1regulated gene can interfering with the normal extracellular matrix lung parenchyma. Further studies on the inhibition of α1(V) chain are necessary to test if gene therapy can attenuate effects of this disease. OFP-13-008 Micropapillary carcinoma has the worst prognosis among stage Ia lung adenocarcinomas T. Zombori * , D. Urban, R. Nemedi, L. Tiszlavicz, J. Furak Objective: In view of the new WHO classification of lung neoplasms, we analyzed the survival of resected stage Ia adenocarcinomas according to their histological type. Method: Between 2004 and 2013, 183 stage Ia adenocarcinomas were resected from 72 men and 111 women (mean age: 62.3 years). The subtypes of the adenocarcinomas were as follows: in situ adenocarcinoma 11 (6 %), minimally invasive 9 (5 %), lepidic 31 (17 %), acinar 45 (24 %), papillary 29 (16 %) , solid 47 (26 %) and micropapillary carcinoma 11 (6 %). The subtypes of adenocarcinomas and the overal survival were compared between the low grade (in situ, minimally invasive, lepidic), intermediate grade (acinar, papillary) and the high grade (solid and micropapillary) adenocarcinoma groups. Results: The 5-year Kaplan-Meier estimates of overall survival were as follows: in situ (100 %), minimally invasive (88.9 %), lepidic (87.7 %), acinar (89.6 %), papillary (85.8 %), solid (65.5 %) and micropapillary (27.3 %) with a significant difference between the low+intermediate and high grade (55.6 %) groups (p = 0.001), and inside the high grade group between solid and micropapillary carcinomas (p = 0.001). Conclusion: Micropapillary adenocarcinoma had the worst survival among the different subtypes of stage Ia adenocarcinomas, therefore adjuvant treatment should be considered even in stage Ia. Objective: To evaluate similarities and differences between diffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia syndrome (DIPNECH) and carcinoid tumours with/without NECH. Method: Clinical and imaging data (gender, age, symptoms, respiratory function, smoking habit, computed-tomography/CT pattern), pathologic features (histotype, tumour size, and stage, mitotic rate, necrosis, central/ peripheral site), immunohistochemical findings (TTF-1, hormonal receptors, CD10, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56, p40, napsin, GRP/ bombesin, ACTH, p70S6K, mTOR, SSTR2, Rb, ALK) and molecular gene mutations (EGFR, KRAS, c-KIT, PDGFRs) were collected from 19 DIPNECH and 132 pulmonary carcinoids. Results: Overall, there were 77 females and 74 males with a median age of 57 years. Fifty-eight percent were non-smokers, 49 % were symptomatic. One-hundred forty-one were typical carcinoids (93.4 %), 110 in stage IA and 82 showed a central/peri-hilar location. Neither molecular alterations nor ALK expression were detected. Patients with DIPNECH significantly differed in terms of gender (all females, p < 0.0001), smoke (non-smokers, p = 0.021), presence of symptoms, obstructive/mixed respiratory function, peripheral location and air-trapping with histologyconfirmed constrictive bronchiolitis (p < 0.0001). Among immunohistochemical markers, DIPNECH was statistically correlated with higher expression of TTF-1, CD10 and GRP/bombesin-like peptide (p < 0.0001). Conclusion: No single biomarker may distinguish DIPNECH from carcinoids with/without NECH, but patients with DIPNECH syndrome are significantly associated with symptomatic small airway alterations. OFP-13-010 Epidermal growth receptor mutations and TTF-1 status in Turkish non-small cell lung carcinoma cases M. Musayeva * , S. Dizbay Sak, S. Boyacigil, O. Coskun, Z. Gencturk * Ankara University, Pathology, Turkey Objective: To investigate the incidence of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) mutations in Turkish non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) patients and to evaluate the associated pathological and immunohistochemical features. Method: 600 primary and metastatic therapy-naive NSCLC cases (biopsy, cytology, resection specimens) were evaluated for EGFR mutation by Sanger sequencing. H&E and immunohistochemical sections were examined; available cases were stained for TTF-1 and NapsinA by forming a tissue array. Results: Sequencing was successful in 532 (88.6 %) cases. A total of 74 mutations were detected in 70 patients (13.1 %) (61.4 % woman, 38.6 % man). The distribution of mutations was 6.8, 51.3, 8.2 and 33.7 %; in exons 18, 19 , 20 and 21 respectively. All EGFR mutant cases, except for one case was positive for TTF-1. All mutant cases were also positive for Napsin A, except for two cases. Conclusion: EGFR mutation rate is lower than that of Asia Pacific in Turkish NSCLC cases. Mutation rate and distribution are similar to other European countries. TTF-1 negativity is a good predictor of a wild type EGFR. We think that, TTF-1 status could be incorporated in molecular algorithm of NSCLC cases in resource poor countries. OFP-13-011 What pathologies have we found in the mediastinum these past 25 years? M. Rassy * , E. Bitar, S. Naderi, G. Tabet, C. Ghorra * Saint Joseph University, Dept. of Pathology, Beirut, Lebanon Objective: To report, for the first time in Lebanon, the descriptive epidemiology of pathologies diagnosed in the mediastinum. Method: All 1039 patients with a mediastinal pathology exam at Hôtel-Dieu de France University Hospital from January 1991 to December 2015 were included. Results: 628 (60.4 %) had a mediastinal neoplasm. Most cases were lymphomas (33.3 %) with a mean age of 34.0 years, or metastases (32.3 %) with a mean age of 59.8 years. Those were followed by thymic neoplasms (17.5 %), ectopic tumours (8.0 %), mesenchymal tumours (5.9 %), germ cell tumours (1.6 % with a mean age of 29.6 years), and other rare tumours (1.4 %) . A striking male predominance was found for metastases and mesenchymal tumours (Male/Female sex ratios of 1.9 and 2.1 respectively). Within thymic neoplasms, thymomas represented 71.8 %. Of the 411 non-tumoural patients (39.6 %), 42.1 % had a granulomatous reaction, 9.0 % a thymic hyperplasia or cyst, and 4.4 % a cyst (bronchogenic/pericardic/enteric). The remaining 44.5 % cases had no specific diagnosis (mostly lymph nodes and thymectomies). The mean age of patients with a granulomatous reaction was 46.4 years, compared to 31.1 years for the cysts. Conclusion: Reporting the descriptive epidemiology of mediastinal pathologies establishes the basis for further investigations. The adopted diagnostic procedures efficacy can now be evaluated. Objective: Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is characterized by thrombus organization, pulmonary remodeling and increased pulmonary vascular resistance. Our aims was to determinate a plasma circulating microRNA profile as a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker of CTEPH. Method: 12 CTEPH patients, 10 patients with pulmonary hypertension of other causes and 10 healthy volunteers were sequentially studied in 2016. All relevant clinical data from medical records, the V/Qscan and/or angiotomography, and right heart catheterization results were analyzed. An optimized protocol for RNA extraction from plasma samples by Qiagen mirneasy serum/plasma kit in combination with the Vac-Man® Vacuum Manifold were used. The Illumina TruSeq Small RNA-Seq Sample Prep Kit was used to generate small RNA library directly from total RNA. Clustering and sequencing was accomplished using the Illumina NextSeq500. Further databases and software used for analysis were the Diana software. Results: The New York Heart Association Functional Classification and the levels of N-terminal-pro-brain-type natriuretic peptide did not differ between pulmonary hypertension groups. High-quality RNA were extracted. Circulating microRNAs were differentially expressed and associated with prognostic outcome (p < 0.05). Conclusion: The MicroRNA profile might reflect pathogenesis of CTEPH, providing some clue for biomarker screening, however it still needed to be validated to clinical practice. Objective: Malignant pleural mesothelioma is a pleural tumour associated with asbestos exposure and subsequent chronic inflammation. Epithelioid mesothelioma is associated with a better patient prognosis compared with sarcomatoid/biphasic subtypes. The aim of this study was to characterize inflammatory cell infiltrates in mesothelioma samples and to correlate morphological features with clinical data. Method: Peritumoural and intratumoural inflammatory cells were characterized by Immunohistochemistry and quantified in 34 mesotheliomas (17 epthelioid and 17 sarcomatoid/biphasic) and expressed as percentage of neoplastic area. Overall (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) after standard first-line platinum/pemetrexed were also evaluated. Results: Higher inflammation percentages were seen in epithelioid mesotheliomas both in intra and peritumoural areas (p = 0.03 and p = 0.05). B lymphocytes were mainly detected in peritumoural area, while T lymphocytes and macrophages were present both at the intra and peritumoural level. Epithelioid mesotheliomas seem to be characterized by higher values of peritumoural B lymphocytes, while sarcomatoid/ bipahasic samples showed higher percentages of intratumoural T lymphocytes and macrophages. A significant correlation was found between total inflammation and PFS (p = 0.03) and between intratumoural macrophage infiltration and OS (p = 0.05). Conclusion: Epithelioid and sarcomatoid/biphasic mesotheliomas are characterized by different inflammation patterns that might impact survival. A confirmatory study on a larger sample size and correlation with asbestos exposure is currently ongoing. Objective: Few recent works report some different morphological features of lung cancer in smokers with and without COPD. To date it is unknown if COPD-associated lung cancer has a different molecular profile. We aimed to analyze gene mutations in adenocarcinoma samples from smokers with COPD versus smokers without COPD by using next generation sequencing (NGS). Method: 27 surgical specimens of lung adenocarcinoma (8 COPD and 19 non-COPD) were analyzed using a 30-gene NGS panel on MiSeq platform. Results: COPD and non-COPD smokers showed a median value of 1.5 and 2 mutations for each patient. When considering only mutations with well known pathogenetic role, at least one gene was altered in 75 % of COPD, 79 % of non-COPD smokers, and the most affected genes were KRAS (48 %), PTEN (19 %), P53 (19 %), EGFR (11 %) with no significant differences among the groups. Sporadic mutations in MET, STK11 and PIK3CA were detected only in non-COPD smokers. Adenocarcinoma of non-COPD smokers showed a higher prevalence of solid/papillary pattern and proliferation index. Conclusion: NGS analysis revealed a partially different molecular profile in lung adenocarcinoma of smokers with and without COPD. The significance of sporadic mutations detected in non COPD smokers and their influence on the different histological pattern of adenocarcinoma should be confirmed by larger scale studies. Objective: Most non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) are diagnosed from small specimens, and classification using standard pathology methods can be difficult. This is important as many therapies and clinical trials are histology-dependent. Our objective was to develop an RNA signature as an adjunct test for histo-pathological classification of NSCLCs. Method: A microarray dataset of resected adenocarcinomas (ADCs) and squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) was used to develop an ADC-SCC classifier. Another dataset of ADCs and non-malignant lung was used for a Tumour vs Nonmalignant classifier. Sample classification was determined by a nearest distance approach. Results: We developed a 62-gene expression signature that contains many genes used in immunostains for NSCLC typing. It includes 42 genes that distinguish ADC from SCC and 20 genes differentiating non-malignant lung from lung cancer. Testing of the TCGA and other public datasets resulted in high prediction accuracies (93-95 %). A prediction score was derived that correlates both with histologic grading and prognosis. Using the HTG EdgeSeq technology (HTG Molecular Diagnostics, Inc. (HTG)) the classifier can be applied to FFPE specimens and core-needle biopsies, demonstrating the potential for deployment in standard clinical practice. Conclusion: Our classifier provides an objective, quantitative method for the pathological classification of NSCLC. OFP-14-001 H3K27me3 immunohistochemistry highlights the inactivated X chromosome (Xi) and predicts sex in nonneoplastic tissues I.-M. Schaefer * , A. Minkovsky, J. L. Hornick * Brigham and Women's Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Boston, USA Objective: Histone 3 trimethylation at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), a crucial epigenetic silencing mark, is detectable by immunohistochemistry (IHC). In mammalian female cells, dosage compensation is achieved by transcriptional silencing of one X chromosome (Xi) by complex epigenetic modifications including H3K27me3. The aim of this study was to evaluate H3K27me3 IHC in nonneoplastic tissues for the detection of the Xi. Thursday, 29 September 2016, 14.00-16.00, Congress-Saal 2 OFP-14 Molecular Pathology Virchows Arch (2016) 469 (Suppl 1):S1-S346 S39 Method: Tissue samples (lymph node, bone marrow, liver, kidney, lung, colon, skin, and breast) from 14 female and 14 male patients, 2 patients with Turner syndrome (45,X), and one with Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) were stained using a monoclonal anti-H3K27me3 antibody. Results: H3K27me3 IHC highlighted the Xi as an eccentric intranuclear dot in all karyotypically normal female but none of the male patients. Interestingly, the Xi was detected in hematopoietic cells in bone marrow from a male patient who had received a female bone marrow transplant 2 years before. Xi was detected in 47,XXY but not in 45,X patients. Conclusion: H3K27me3 IHC detects the Xi with high sensitivity and specificity. With prior knowledge of patient sex, this may be useful for detecting extent of mosaicism in Turner syndrome, clarifying sample identity, and possibly also assessing chimerism after gender mismatched transplant. Objective: Clinical responses to immunotherapy by anti-PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies in NSCLC may be associated with PD-L1 expression. We investigated the activation of Kras-mutant subtypes as a mechanism of PD-L1 regulation in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). Method: PD-L1 expression was evaluated by IHC (SP142 clone, Ventana) on 117 LUAD (KrasWT, n = 51; Krasmut, n = 66). Stable cell lines were generated by transfection of Kras-G12D, G12V, G12C and WT plasmids into Beas2B bronchial cells. Results: IHC analysis showed higher expression of PD-L1 in both tumour and immune cells in Kras-mutant LUAD compared with KrasWT tumours (37 vs. 18 %; P = 0.005). Kras-mutant PD-L1+ tumours had increased CD66b+neutrophil infiltrates and lower CD8+ T-cell content than PD-L1 − tumours. In vitro, mutant Kras led to significantly higher cell-surface PD-L1 expression and PD-L1 transcripts, notably in KrasG12C and KrasG12V cells, suggesting PD-L1 transcriptional regulation. There was differential activation of NF-kB, ERK and Pi3k/Akt pathways between Kras-mutant subtypes. PD-L1 was upregulated 3-fold by stimulation with IFNγ, independently of the Kras codon subtypes. Instead, hypoxia significantly increased PD-L1 expression in KrasG12C and KrasG12D cells only. Conclusion: PD-L1 may be a therapeutic target in Kras-mutant LUAD. According to the Kras mutation subtype, potential drugs targeting the NF-kB, ERK or Pi3k/Akt pathways may increase the antitumour adaptive immune responses. Results: The analytic validation demonstrated 70 % sensitivity and 98 % specificity for the ctDNA assays (limit-of-detection <5 %). ctDNA yield was not affected by storage in BCT tubes for up to 3 days. Real-time longitudinal ctDNA analysis showed that among 18 % of initially EGFR mutated patients, 33 % acquire T790M resistance mutation during treatment. 74 % of patients had at least one somatic alteration detected by NGS assay, with druggable alterations in various genes (e.g. MET, FGFR3). Mean turnaround time was 13 [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] days for tumour tissue and 6 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] days for ctDNA analyses. Conclusion: Rigorously validated ctDNA assays is an alternative approach for tumour tissue molecular analysis and may enable longitudinal examination of molecular profiling in NSCLC patients. Method: Full length molecular models of wild type RAS proteins were constructed using iterative threading alignment. The models were refined for the structural parameters and thermodynamic parameters. Subsequently, cavity analysis and molecular docking was conducted between GTP/GDP and RAS proteins. Results: Superimposition of RAS proteins with its mutants at tertiary structure level did not show any considerable differences with RMSD deviation ranging from 0.06 to 0.10 Å. However, mutant residues superimposition showed noticeable differences in the spatial orientation. Objective: Targeting the PDL1 (CD274)-PD-1 axis prevents evasion of tumour cells from the host's immune response. While PDL1 immunohistochemistry was introduced as a predictive biomarker with variable power, data on PDL1 copy number changes (CNVs) are limited. Method: Employing The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) datasets, we comprehensively analyzed 22 major cancer types for PDL1 CNVs including core amplified and deleted regions and relations to mutational loads as well as gene expression. Results: PDL1 deletions were more prevalent than gains, and CNVs were differentially distributed across cancer types. Moreover, we observed significant correlations between PDL1 CNVs and mRNA expression levels for many cancer types. Tumours with PDL1 gains were associated with significantly higher mutational loads compared to normal cases. Core amplified and deleted regions shared by more than 80 % of the cancer cases contained many genes with biological implications: e.g. CDKN2A, JAK2, KDM4C, class I interferons, IL33, among others. Our analysis indicates indicates different natures of PDL1 expression, i.e. 'adaptive' vs. 'oncogenic', and demonstrates that PDL1 CNVs are frequent across major cancer types, are associated with higher mutational loads, and influence PD-L1 expression levels. Conclusion: In conclusion, PDL1 CNVs might be suitable predictive biomarkers for immunotherapy regimens across cancer types. OFP- The importance of NFATc1 in the pathogenesis and survival of B cell lymphomas K. Murti * , A. Avots Objective: Evaluation of PD-L1 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC), a new predictive factor for therapies targeting PD1 and PD-L1, relies on several assays and semi-quantitative assessment by pathologists. We evaluated in situ hybridization at the mRNA level (RNAscope) as a new method to assess more quantitatively PD-L1 expression and compared results with IHC in a series of squamous cell lung cancer (SQCC). Method: 181 cases of resected SQCC were collected on tissue microarrays. In situ mRNA detection of PD-L1 in tumour cells was performed using a chromogenic RNAscope assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) combined with image analysis (Spot Studio software). PD-L1 IHC was performed with E1L3N and SP263 clones. Results: PD-L1 expression in IHC was highly concordant with the 2 antibodies used. PD-L1 mRNA expression was detected at various levels (average number of spots per cell: 0.741, range 0.01-9.61) and strongly correlated with immunohistochemistry (Spearman's rank correlation coefficient: 0.803). Conclusion: In situ hybridization (RNAscope) is feasible to evaluate PD-L1 expression in tumour cells using formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue samples, and strongly correlates with IHC. It may provide a quantitative and standardized assessment of PD-L1 expression in tumour cells using FFPE samples. Clinical relevance of this approach remains to be evaluated. OFP-14-008 Comparative analysis of lung adenocarcinoma cases tested for ALK Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Fluorescent in situ Hybridization (FISH) P. Wagle * , N. Jambhekar, K. Prabhash, R. Kumar Objective: The aim of this study was to establish a comprehensive strategy for the detection of clinically relevant somatic mutations in plasma of lung cancer patients both at diagnosis and during disease follow-up. Method: Plasma samples from controls were used to optimize the experimental approach. To evaluate our strategy, plasma samples obtained at different stages of disease were collected from 100 lung cancer patients. Different enrichment strategies where tested. All amplified products were used to prepare libraries and sequenced using Ion Torrent systems. Digital PCR was used to confirm results. Results: In plasma isolated from lung cancer patients, tumour derived genetic mutations could be identified in as little as 10 ng of cfDNA. Mutations identified in cfDNA mirrored mutations identified in tumour biopsies. Mutations with VAF <0.1 % could be detected in cfDNA and confirmed using Digital PCR. Response to therapy could be observed by tracking specific mutations in cfDNA and detection of tumour relapse could be anticipated up to 2 months when compared to standard methodologies. Conclusion: In conclusion, the comprehensiveness and speed of the NGS methodology, combined with the high sensitivity of detection, delivered a protocol for detection of somatic mutations in cfDNA for non-invasive real time therapy response monitoring of cancer patients. Objective: Tumours release mutated DNA into the blood, which can be analyzed by sensitive molecular methods. This "liquid biopsies" are interesting in lung cancer pathology, for follow-up and monitoring of patients under TKI. There is not yet a gold standard for mutation testing of liquid biopsies. We have compared the Biorad QX200 droplet digital PCR and the Ion Torrent Semiconductor sequencing for analyzing mutations in liquid biopsies of lung and skin cancer patients. Method: DNA was extracted from blood samples of patients suffering from lung or skin cancer using the Qiagen QIAamp circulating nucleic acid extraction kit. Mutation analysis was performed with the Biorad QX200 and the Ion Torrent Proton sequencer (Ion Ampliseq Colon/ Lung; Cancer-Hotspot panel). Results: The Ion Ampliseq panel analysis was able to detect a range of hotspot mutations in a single sample. Noise ratio of the sequencing approach was 0,5 % in formalin fixed samples and 0,1 % in liquid biopsies. Digital PCR had a lower noise ratio and slightly higher sensitivity. It was able to determine the reliability of the measurement in each analysis by counting molecules. However, only single mutations can be detected per PCR reaction. Conclusion: Both approaches are valid methods to detect mutations in circulating tumour DNA. The additional sensitivity of digital PCR comes at the cost of using nearly all available DNA for a single hotspot analysis. NGS is sensitive enough to detect biologically relevant levels of mutated DNA offering the advantage of analyzing a range of mutations in parallel. This data suggests Ion Torrent Ampliseq as the most suitable methodology for the plasma analysis of multiple tumour markers. Complete workflow for detection of somatic mutations at 0.1 % frequency from cell-free DNA using Ion Torrent platform D. Brinza * , C. Guillen Rovira, J. Gu, R. Chien, D. Dhingra, J. Au-Young, F. Hyland, K. Bramlett * Thermo Fisher Scientific, South San Francisco, USA Objective: To demonstrate a research use only workflow that includes blood collection, cfDNA isolation, library preparation, sequencing, and data analysis to enable detection of rare DNA variants in blood plasma samples. Such workflow provides a non-invasive approach to monitor cancer status and evaluate cancer evolution in the future. Method: Blood samples were collected using EDTA tubes followed by plasma preparation and cfDNA isolation using MagMAX cfDNA Isolation Kit. Library preparation was performed using Lung cfDNA Assay. Barcoded libraries were pooled and sequenced on Ion Torrent sequencing platform. For data analysis, we developed an analysis algorithm that models errors accumulated during amplification and sequencing, and accurately reconstructs sequence of original DNA molecules based on tagged next generation sequencing reads. Analysis enables sensitive and specific detection of somatic mutations to 0.1 % allele ratio. We demonstrated the analysis in control and archived cfDNA research samples where 157 biomarkers relevant to non-small cell lung cancer were interrogated simultaneously. Results: We achieved~90 % detection sensitivity at 0.1 % frequency or 100 % sensitivity at 0.5 % frequency using engineered cfDNA samples. We validated the workflow on a set of research samples from matched tumour FFPE and blood plasma collected from research subjects with NSCLC. Results indicate high sensitivity of the workflow and high concordance between variants detected in the two types of research samples. We demonstrated a highly sensitive and reliable research workflow to detect rare somatic mutations in circulating cfDNA samples. Significant overlapping of mutations discovered in FFPE tumour and cfDNA samples suggests that this workflow may be used to monitor tumour dynamics in NSCLC and potentially other tumours in the future. OFP- Expression of programmed death ligand (PD-L1) in different tumours: Comparison of several current available antibody clones S. Kintsler * , T. Braunschweig * University Hospital RWTH, Pathology, Aachen, Germany Objective: PD-L1 is a surface molecule of cancer cells, which contacts with PD1 molecule of T cells and inhibits the cytotoxic effect of lymphocytes against tumour cells. The modern target therapy uses this interaction to inhibit the PD-1 molecule of T cells to facilitate tumour cell death. The immunohistochemical stain against PD-L1 seems to be important for stratification of patients for these check-point therapies. The aim of this study was to evaluate different primary antibodies against PD-L1 next to lymphocyte characterization, PD1 and PD-L2 expression and PD-L1 amplification. Method: Frequent types of carcinoma next to mesothelioma were selected and stained by immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and fluorescence in-situ hybridization. For primary antibodies, current available antibodies against PD-L1 (DAKO, Cell Signaling, Ventana, Biolegend, Abcam, Zeta), PD-L2 and PD1 were established and analyzed by light/ fluorescence microscopy and polyspectral microscopy (Perkin Elmer Vectra). In addition, stains to detect intratumoural lymphocytes (CD3, CD20, CD8, CD57) were used. Conclusion: Concurrent detection of all this markers on one section with different color signals helps to understand the different staining characteristics of a broad spectrum of PD-L1 antibodies, next to evaluation of additional, possibly therapy relevant expression patterns. Objective: The lack of clear histological criteria and reliable immunohistochemical markers prevents clear determination of atypical Spitz nevi (ASN) toward Spitz nevus (SN) or Spitzoid melanoma (SM). Expression of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) in Spitz tumours has not been studied so far. Method: We evaluated HDAC2 expression in 78 cases of Spitz tumours (SN, ASN and SM) using immunohistochemistry. The percentage of positive was analyzed in epidermal, superficial and deep dermal parts and compared with clinical (sex and age of patients, localization and tumour size) and histological characteristics (histological type, thickness and depth of invasion of SM and mitotic count). Results: High expression of HDAC2 was observed in all tumour parts (82.9 ± 12.60, 79.8 ± 15.33, 74.1 ± 15.31) . HDAC2 expression was not associated with different clinical parameters. Moderate positive correlation of HDAC2 expression in different tumour parts was found. No difference in the HDAC2 expression was found between histological types of Spitz tumours. Huge variations in HDAC2 expression were found in SM, but no association with thickness, depth of invasion and mitotic count was found. Conclusion: The expression of HDAC2 in Spitz tumours is high and homogeneous throughout, and it could be present from the early stages of their development. Objective: High mobility group protein A2 (HMGA2) is architectural transcription factor which plays important role in cell differentiation and stem cell maintenance. Its expression in actinic keratosis (AK). Bowen's disease (BD) and invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has not been studied so far. Method: We examined 78 AK, 48 BD and 173 SCC using immunohistochemistry. The level of HMGA2 expression was evaluated semiquantitatively as low (≤30 % of positive cells) and high (>30 % of positive cells). Distribution of positive cells was evaluated as non-diffuse and diffuse. Results: Low expression was frequent in AK (80.8 %) and BD (68.8 %) compared to SCC (36.4 %) (p 0.001). Diffuse distribution was often seen in SCC (70.1 %), while non-diffuse was frequent in AK (80 %) and BD (51.5 %) (p 0.001). The level of HMGA2 expression wasn't associated with SCC grade, diameter or thickness. Diffuse distribution was often present in moderately (74.5 %) and poorly differentiated SCC (89.1 %) compared to well differentiated SCC (53.7 %) (p 0.001). Conclusion: The increase in HMGA2 expression could play significant role in the development of invasive SCC of the skin, but the role in its progression could be less important. Optimisation of tissue and plasma assessment of BRAF mutational status in metastatic malignant melanoma by Objective: The objective of this study was to evaluate the feasibility and analytical performance of the Idylla™ (Biocartis) system for i) characterization of V600 BRAF mutations at diagnosis and ii) minimal residual disease monitoring. Method: FFPE sections and cfDNA from plasma of 20 patients with metastatic malignant melanoma was tested for V600 BRAF mutations, before and after targeted or systemic treatment, using the fully integrated real-time PCR-based platform (Idylla™, Biocartis, Mechelen, Belgium) . Results were compared to pyrosequencing mutation analysis (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and BRAFV600E immunohistochemistry (VE1 clone, Ventana, Tucson, AZ) on tumour tissue from the ISO15189-accredited laboratory. Results: The analysis on tumour tissue with the ISO15189-reference method yielded 90 % agreement. The concordance rate between tumour tissue and plasma cfDNAwas 70 % before treatment. None of the patients showed residual BRAF mutation after Vemurafenib treatment. Overall, the turnaround time was quick (<90 min). Conclusion: The Idylla™ system is a highly reliable, rapid and sensitive platform for detection of V600 BRAF mutations both in tissue and plasma samples, providing an efficient alternative to conventional diagnostic methods, particularly for routine diagnostics laboratories with limited experience in molecular pathology. OFP-15-005 Nodular superficial thrombophlebitis: A study of clinical and histopathology spectrum of 34 cases P. Sitthinamsuwan * , P. Hutachuda, S. Hanamornroongruang, P. Chanyachailert, P. Pattanaprichakul * Siriraj Hospital Bangkok, Dept. of Pathology, Thailand Objective: To determine clinical manifestations and histopathology spectrum of nodular superficial thrombophlebitis (ST). Method: Retrospectively review of 34 skin biopsies diagnosed as ST. Clinical manifestations and histopathology features were described. Results: All 34 cases of ST, The most presention was multiple generalized bilateral leg nodules (32 patients). Ulceration, group arrangement and linear pattern were found in few patients. Histopathlogy revealed mostly septal panniculitis with inflammatory cell infiltration in muscular wall of vein and thrombosis in the lumen. We found predominantly granulomatous phlebitis (35 %), predominantly lymphocytic phlebitis (32.5 %), predominantly neutrophilic phlebitis (26.5 %) and mixture of neutrophil and granulomatous phlebitis (6 %). Small-vesseled vasculitis was found (11.7 %). One showed aneurysmal change. Immunofluorescence demonstrates superficial vessel wall deposition of IgM and /or complement (53 %). Conclusion: Cutaneous manifestations and inflammatory response of nodular ST were similar to cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa (c-PAN). Although, vasculitis was present, this was not indicated of c-PAN. Objective: Our goal was to analyze morphological, ultrastructural and molecular features of α1(V) and α2(V) chains and COL5A1, COL5A2 gene expression in fibrillogenesis from patients with early systemic sclerosis (SSc)-related cutaneous fibrosis in order to understand the protein and molecular pathways implicated in cutaneous disease. Method: Skin biopsies were obtained from 5 consecutive patients with SSc-related fibrosis and treatment-naïve, and 5 healthy controls. Immunofluorescence and immune electron microscopy were performed to characterize microscopic and submicroscopic changes of α1(V) and α2(V) chains. COL5A1 and COL5A2 mRNA was evaluated by qPCR. Results: In skin of patients immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy confirmed increased markers of α1(V) and α2(V) chains in reticular dermis, in addition to marked loss of α1(V) in the papillary dermis and overexpression of α2(V) in capillaries and vessels. COL5A1 and COL5A2 mRNA expression was increased, nevertheless relative level of α1(V) expression was significantly reduced in cutaneous fibroblasts. Interestingly, inhibition of COL5A2 gene was associated with increased expression of COL5A1 gene. Conclusion: These results highlight major pathogenic pathways relevant to skin in SSc-related fibrosis: a post-translational modification of α1(V) chain, thus interfering with the normal extracellular matrix formation in papillary dermis. Further studies on the inhibition of α1(V) chain are necessary to test if gene therapy can attenuate effects of this disease. Expression of a long non-coding RNA NEAT1 is significantly higher in MCPyV-positive Merkel cell carcinomas than MCPyV-negative ones G. Akizuki * , K. Imamura, T. Yamada, R. Mizutani, M. Matsushita, T. Iwasaki, D. Nonaka, S. Kuwamoto, K. Nagata, K. Hayashi, N. Akimitsu * Tottori University, Dept. of Medical, Yonago, Japan Objective: Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCPyV) is monoclonally integrated into about 80 % of Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC), an aggressive neuroendocrine skin cancer. In this study, we investigated the involvement of NEAT1, a nuclear long noncoding RNA participating in the immune-regulation upon viral infection, in the MCC. Method: In 15 MCPyV-positive and 12 MCPyV-negative MCCs, expression level of NEAT1 was determined by RT-qPCR. Pasraspeckles were visualized by RNA-FISH. Expression profiles of MCPyV-related or NEAT1-regulated genes were compared based on public microarray data. Results: We firstly quantified expression of NEAT1 and SFPQ, a transcript factor, in MCPyV-positive and -negative MCCs. NEAT1 expression level was upregulated at almost two times in MCPyV-positive MCC comparing with MCPyV-negative ones (P < 0.05). Paraspeckle numbers of MCPyV-positive and -negative MCCs were approximately 2:1. 15 genes including immune-related genes overlapped among two profiles of gene expressions we sited. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that NEAT1 regulates some genes including immune-related genes in MCPyV-positive MCCs by forming more number of paraspeckle. This is the first report of NEAT1 expression which may play as an actual regulator of genes in MCC. OFP-15-008 BRAF V600E inter-and intra-tumour heterogeneity in primary melanoma and corresponding metastases L. B. Nielsen * , J. Lade-Keller, T. Steiniche, H. Schmidt * Aarhus University Hospital, Pathology, Denmark Objective: To examine the extent of inter-and intra-tumoural heterogeneity of BRAF V600E in primary tumours and their corresponding metastases. Method: Using BRAF V600E immunohistochemistry and Hematoxylin-Eosin stained slides inter-tumoural heterogeneity were studied in 255 samples from 56 patients (56 primary melanomas and 199 correspondingmetastatic samples) and intra-tumoural heterogeneity were studied in 482 samples from 224 patients. Results: Complete BRAF V600E inter-tumoural homogeneity was found between the primary tumour and their corresponding metastases in all 56 examined patients. We found BRAF V600E intra-tumoural heterogeneity in 17 cases: 3 with a positive clone in a negative tumour, 5 with a negative clone in a positive tumour, 9 with focal areas staining with other intensities than the majority of the tumour. All of the found nevus remnants (n = 9) had a positive BRAF V600E expression and so had their corresponding primary melanoma. In one case we incidentally found a BRAF V600E positive nevus in close relation to a wild type primary melanoma. Conclusion: Primary tumour tissue can be used just as safely as metastatic tissue for BRAF V600E mutation analysis since inter-tumoural heterogeneity does not exist. Intra-tumoural heterogeneity and coexisting nevi do exist in some cases and may influence BRAF inhibitor therapy response. OFP-15-009 Fibril and network-forming collagen may influence crosslinked density of skin in diabetic rats W. Rosolia Teodoro * , V. Protocevich Toledo, S. Catanozi, A. P. Pereira Velosa, A. dos Santos-Filho, V. Capelozzi * Universidade de São Paulo, Medical School, Dept. of Rheumatology, Brazil Objective: Considering the poor healing of diabetic wound-repair process of diabetic our aim was to clarify whether the fibril and network-forming collagen may influence crosslinked density of skin in diabetic rats. Method: Diabetes was induced in Wistar male rats, by streptozotocin inoculation. The animals were submitted to euthanasia at 7 (n = 10, DG7d) and 30 days (n = 10, DG30d). Matched control groups were inoculated with saline (n = 10, CG7d; n = 10, CG30d). The skin biopsies were analyzed by immunofluorescence and morphometry for fibril (I, III, V) and network (IV, VI) forming collagen. Results: DG7d showed collagen type I relatively decreased, type V almost unchanged and types III, IV and VI highly expressed, compared to controls. In DG30d the expression of types I and V collagen decreased. Already types III and IV decreased slightly in relation to DG7d, but was more expressed that controls groups. However, type VI collagens were highly expressed in DG30d. Statistic value p < 0.0001. The present study revealed significantly increase levels of types III, IV and VI collagen and decrease levels of types I and V in early stage of diabetic skin, thus suggesting decrease in the wound tensile strength. New approaches should be done to evaluate whether these collagen modulation provides a potential strategy for wound healing to ameliorate the ulceration in diabetic populations. OFP-15-010 T cell landscape in primary melanoma predicts the survival of patients with metastatic disease after their treatment with dendritic cell Objective: Tumour infiltrating lymphocytes appear to be a predictor of survival in many cancers, including cutaneous melanoma. We applied automated multispectral imaging to determine whether density and distribution of T cells within primary cutaneous melanoma correlate with survival of metastatic melanoma patients after dendritic cell (DC) vaccination. Method: CD3+ T cell infiltration in primary tumours from 77 metastatic melanoma patients treated with DC vaccination was quantified using the ratio of intratumoural versus peritumoural T cell densities (I/P ratio). To evaluate I/P ratio as a predictive biomarker, we also analyzed 19 chemotherapy-treated patients. Results: Patients with longer survival after DC vaccination had stronger T cell infiltration than patients with shorter survival in a discovery cohort of 19 patients (p = 0.000026) and a validation cohort of 39 patients (p = 0.000016). I/P ratio was the strongest predictor of survival in a multivariate analysis including M substage and serum LDH level. Longer survival times of DC-vaccinated compared to chemotherapy treated patients was observed for high (p = 0.000566), but not low (p = 0.154) I/P ratios. Conclusion: In conclusion, T cell infiltration into primary melanoma is a strong predictor of survival after DC vaccination in metastatic melanoma patients. The infiltration remains predictive even after adjustment for latestage prognostic markers. Our findings suggest that the I/P ratio is a potential predictive biomarker for treatment selection. Objective: In non melanoma skin cancer (NMSC), as in several tumours, the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been established as an important therapeutic target. However, the benefit from EGFR inhibitors appears to be limited to a subset of patients. It has been recently demonstrated that EGFR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are significantly associated with increased EGFR copy number and therapies response. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate genetic variations impact on EGFR expression in NMSC patients. Method: This study enrolled 12 patients with NMSC subdivided in two groups according to EGFR gene polymorphism rs 1050171 mutation: six heterozygous for the mutation (G/A) and six homozygous for the mutation (A/A). The expression of EGFR protein was investigated by immunohistochemistry on formalin fixed paraffin embedded sections using monoclonal antibody (NCL-EGFR-384, Novocastra). Scoring took into account the percentage of stained tumour cells and the staining intensity. The results showed that all sections had membranous staining. Over expression of EGFR was found in all patients with GA genotype and in 3 of 6 patients with AA genotype. Conclusion: This observation suggests that a simple SNP analysis might result in a an improvement in the selection of patients amenable to anti-EGFR therapy. Further studies are necessary to validate our findings in larger cohorts. OFP-15-012 A clinicopathological features and treatment outcome of cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa in Thailand P. Pattanaprichakul * , S. Hanamornroongruang, P. Chanyachailert, P. Hutachuda, P. Sitthinamsuwan * Siriraj Hospital, Dermatology, Bangkok, Thailand Objective: To evaluate clinicopathological features and treatment outcome of cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa (cPAN). Method: Twenty-five cases of cPAN were retrospectively reviewed of clinical presentation and treatment outcome. Histopathologic finding were evaluated by consensus of two dermatopathologists. Results: Seven men and 18 women were included with the average age of 34 years (14-52 years) . Majority of cases presented with multiple nodules on both legs (92 %). Antinuclear antibody (ANA) was detected in 4 cases (4 %) and none of the cases showed systemic autoimmune/connective diseases. Histopathologically, detection of internal elastic lamina using Verhoeff-Van Gieson (VVG) elastic stain was the most common key features found in our study (68 %) followed by fibrinoid necrosis of muscular walls (56 %) and small-vessel vasculitis (32 %). Concentric continuous smooth muscle pattern was the supportive feature for diagnosis of arterial involvement in cPAN, however; we found one case of discontinuous wreath pattern of muscular wall despite the present of internal elastic lamina. Most cases were treated with oral anti-inflammatory agent as colchicine (81 % Objective: Breast carcinoma is the most common malignant neoplasm and the second cause of cancer death in women worldwide. Galectin-3 is a member of the beta-galactoside-binding family that plays a role in cell proliferation, adhesion, and migration. A prospective study was done to determine the role of galectin-3 in breast cancer chemoresistance with the aim of establishing galectin-3 expression as a biomarker for drug resistance. Method: In total, 75 cases of breast carcinoma treated with neo-adjuvant therapy were collected and tissue samples from pre-neo-adjuvant therapy as well as tissues from post-neo-adjuvant therapy of those cases were collected and stained with immunohistochemistry. Results: Almost one quarter of the cases show complete pathological response with complete disappearance of the tumour following neoadjuvant therapy, while three quarters of the cases show incomplete pathological response. Approximately, 70 % of cases with complete response show no expression of galectin -3 in breast cancer cells in pre-neo-adjuvant biopsies and 61 % of residual cancer cells show high expression of galectin-3. Conclusion: There is a significant correlation between the expression of Galectin-3 by breast carcinoma cells and resistance to chemotherapy. Clinicopathological profile and receptor status in breast carcinoma: Single institutional North Indian experience A. Jain * , V. Maheshwari * Jains Diagnostic Centre, Aligarh, India Objective: To evaluate the clinicopathological prognostic parameters and correlate them with estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and Her 2neu receptor status in females diagnosed with breast cancer. Breast cancer incidence has increased in India, but the prognosis is still poor with high mortality. Majority of the patients present at higher stage, possibly due to inadequate awareness and screening programmes. The analysis of receptor status is still not being done in all cases especially the cases being diagnosed and treated at periphery. We aim to present the Indian breast cancer scenario emphasizing upon the importance of receptor status evaluation in all cases. The 3 year study (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) included all cases of breast cancer diagnosed on histopathology in department of pathology of our medical college & hospital, situated in North India and catering to the urban, sub-urban as well as rural population. The clinicopathological data of all cases was collected. Receptor status for ER, PR and Her 2neu was done using immunohistochemistry. Results: Breast carcinoma in our population presented at a younger age then western countries. Invasive ductal carcinoma-Not otherwise specified, grade III and triple negative (ER-, PR-, Her 2neu-) were the commonest histological type, grade and receptor status respectively. Conclusion: The breast carcinoma profile in north indian population has a histologically aggressive phenotype with possible lower responsiveness to conventional hormonal and targeted antibody treatment. However, there is a need for receptor analysis in all cases so as to identify the cases with better therapeutic response. Objective: The aim of this cohort study is to demonstrate that true local recurrence is rare even though radiation is omitted, if a systematic assessment of the tangential shaved margins guarantees complete removal of carcinoma. Method: A precision method of margin assessment was developed for wide local excision using an adjustable mold to prevent the three dimensional specimen from distorting during fixation. We prospectively studied consecutive 108 wide local excisions of breast carcinomas ( (2) and Group B 2 (1) such cases, respectively (the difference not statistically significant). The patients showed very much lower recurrence rates after breast conservation surgery alone without radiation therapy if the negative margin is assured by a systematic and precision margin assessment. Objective: Triple negative invasive breast carcinomas are a group of tumours with different microscopic appearances. A characteristic microscopic feature of a sub-group of these tumours is the presence of comedo-type necrosis. This study aimed at comparing the demographic features and prognosis of this subgroup of tumours with the rest of triple negative carcinomas. Method: The study included 65 triple negative invasive breast carcinomas which were divided into 2 groups: those with comedo necrosis (23) and those without (42). Cases were compared as regards the immunohistochemical expression of cytokeratin (CK) 5, CD10, Maspin and Claudin 1, 3 and 4, as well as patients' ages, size of tumours, axillary lymph node status and incidence of recurrences. Results: There was no statistically significant difference as regards age, tumours size or the expression of CK 5, CD10, Maspin or Claudin 3 and 4. Claudin 1 was significantly less expressed in tumours with comedo necrosis (13 vs 26 % for tumours with no comedo necrosis) and also showed a significantly less incidence of axillary lymph node metastasis (13 vs 52 %) and recurrences (14 vs 27 %) . Conclusion: Triple negative invasive breast carcinomas with comedo necrosis have a better prognosis than the majority of other triple negative tumours. Assessment of discordance of immunohistochemistry and in SITU hybridization HER2 testing results in breast cancer specimens: A regional slide-exchange ring study N. Basheska * , L. Latinovic-Tadic, L. Amidzic, I. Jovanic, Z. Milovanovic, G. Petrushevska, T. Ivkovic-Kapicl, S. Usaj-Knezevic * UCRO Skopje, Dept. of Histopathology and Cytology, Republic of Macedonia Objective: A regional slide-exchange ring study with four testing rounds was designed in order to assess immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) interlaboratory consensus of HER2-testing in breast cancer among four experienced testing centers. Method: In each round, one center selected and sent to the other centers two specimen sets (one for IHC, and one for ISH) consisting of four breast cancers. Institutions could participate irrespective of the staining methods, protocols, and antibodies used for IHC or ISH testing of HER2 status. Results were analyzed by an independent coordinator. Results: After the IHC testing complete consensus among the four institutions was achieved for 7 (43.8 %) of the 16 specimens. Retesting by ISH of the 8 specimens scored as equivocal by at least one laboratory, increased the concordance rate to 68.8 % (11/16), while a diagnostic discordance was found in two cases. A complete concordance between testing centers for ISH was found for 9 (56.3 %) of the 16 specimens. The group of discordant findings consisted of 4 cases having borderline HER2-positivity determined by at least one center, and one case with diagnostic discordance. Conclusion: The current regional ring study in which the level of consensus among the testing centers for HER2 testing by both IHC and ISH was similar to already reported in previous studies, in spite of the unstandardized conditions, highlights the usefulness of implementing such slide-exchange programs as an additional instrument for external quality control. Objective: Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) 1 expression in breast small cell carcinoma has been reported only rarely. This reported case is unique because of the first diagnosed in the axillary lymph node metastasis of unknown primary. Method: A 60-year old women presented with a palpable mass in the right axillary region. A PET/CT Scan revealed a markedly FDG avid right axillary lymph nodes. PET/CT Scan showed no other malignancy other than axillary lymph nodes. As no origin for the tumour was found, a lymph node biopsy was performed. Results: Microscopic investigation showed typical appearance of a small cell carcinoma with sheeds, irregular nests and trabeculae of small to medium sized cells with minimal cytoplasm, hyperchromatic nuclei, and inconspicuous nucleoli. By immunohistrochemistry the invasive carcinoma cells were positive for neuroendocrine markers: synaptophysin and CD56, were positive for TTF-1, E-cadherin, CK5/6. The carcinoma cells were positive for estrogen receptor, but negative for progesterone receptor, GCDPF-15, HER2/neu. As a result, the initial investigations of the biopsy gave suspicion of metastasis from breast cancer. The patient underwent a right radical mastectomy. In the upper iner quadrant there was multple firm irregularly shaped small nodules with largest diammeter 15 mm. Sixteen axillary lymph nodes examined were all involved by metastatic tumour. Conclusion: We report a case of primary small cell carcinoma of the breast with coexisting carcinoma in situ in which the invasive and in situ component both showed a diffuse and strong positive reaction to TTF-1 and neuroendocrine markers. (0), focally positive (1-10), or positive (11-300). Results: The rate of focal positivity or positivity for GATA3 was significantly higher in the molecular apocrine type (73.9 %, 17/23) than in other types of TNBCs (p = 0.001). The mean GATA3 score of molecular apocrine type TNBC was significantly higher than that of the other types (p = 0.001) and differed significantly between AR-positive andnegative TNBCs (p < 0.001). Conclusion: In conclusion, GATA3 expression was correlated strongly with AR-positive, molecular apocrine type TNBCs. Co-expression of AR and GATA3 is a specific feature of molecular apocrine type TNBC, which may serve as a diagnostic aid for cancer of unknown primary. Results: Core needle biopsy showed tubular glands lined by single layer of cells, lacking a myoepithelial cell layer, embedded in sclerotic stroma. ER and PR were negative. S100 was positive. The differential diagnosis included tubular carcinoma and MGA and on the basis of absent hormone receptor expression and S100 positivity, the latter was favoured. Subsequent wide local excision showed a 4 cm mass, demonstrating a spectrum of MGA and atypical MGA, merging with invasive carcinoma. Centrally, a 2 cm area showed unequivocal features of invasive ductal carcinoma grade 2, negative for ER, PR, Her2, CK5/6 and CK14 while positive for S100, Actin, AE1/3 and p53(weak). The sentinel node was negative for metastasis. Margins were extensively involved, necessitating subsequent mastectomy. The patient underwent systemic chemotherapy and remains well 3 years later. Objective: p63 is used as an immunohistochemical marker of squamous, myoepithelial, prostate basal and urothelial cells in histopathology practice. p40 is reported to be superior to p63 as a squamous carcinoma marker in the differential diagnosis of lung cancer, and equal to p63 as a myoepithelial marker in breast lesions. We investigated the p40 expression of breast cancer tumour cells in molecular subtypes, and in metaplastic breast cancer subtypes reported to express p63 frequently. Method: Breast carcinomas of each surrogate immunohistochemistry classified molecular subtypes and 20 metaplastic breast carcinomas were retrospectively evaluated for p40 expression by immunohistochemistry using a monoclonal antibody. Results: p40 expression was detected in 5/37 ( Results: The number of involved lymph nodes ranged from 1 to 14 (mean 3.77 ± 3.14). Mean of Ki67 expression level in primary tumour site was 16.93 ± 11.76 % (6÷53), in lymph node metastases-15.80 ± 9.68 % (4÷37). A statistically significant correlation was found between tumour grade and Ki-67 in primary BC (p = 0.015), but no such relationship was found in regional metastases (p > 0.05). There were no significant correlations between Ki-67 in primary BC and lymph node metastasis with the number of lymph nodes involved, HR expression levels, Her2-status, histological subtypes, patients' age (p > 0.05). There was a significant correlation between Ki67 level in lymph node metastases with IPPI and NPI (p = 0,012 и p = 0,038, respectively), unlike Ki67 in primary BC. It was also shown that Ki-67 index in lymph node metastasis is significantly higher in case of NPPI values ≥16 (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Ki-67 in the regional metastases has more important prognostic value than in the primary BC lesion. Regulation of H-ras expression and caspase-3 apoptotic cell death in breast cancer epithelial MCF-7 cells by cadmium D. Anestakis * , S. Petanidis, E. Gkika, E. Zagelidou, N. Raikos, A. Salifoglou Results: The findings show a significant modulation effect of cadmium on H-ras gene expression accompanied by up-regulation of caspase-3related apoptosis in the concentration range of 100-1000 nM cadmium. Concurrently, there is a decrease in MCF-7 proliferation and up regulation in p21 protein expression. Conclusion: Collectively, the results a) indicate an interplay of cadmium with H-ras (wt and G12V), with cadmium exhibiting a significant concentration-dependent effect on the modulation of H-ras expression, cell viability and proliferation, and b) project distinctly interwoven roles for both cadmium and H-ras in aberrant physiologies in cancer cells. As a consequence, ample insight is gained into the modulating interplay among cadmium, H-ras(wt)/H-ras(G12V) and cellular media in MCF-7 cells, that contribute considerably to our understanding of that metal ion's (bio)chemical potential toward tumourigenesis. (1996) (1997) (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) . Microvascular proliferation was evaluated on full sections using dual immunohistochemical staining of Factor VIII and Ki-67 and estimated by vascular proliferation index (VPI); the ratio between the number of vessels containing proliferating endothelial cells and total number of tumour microvessels. Results: High VPI was strongly associated with several aggressive features in breast cancer, such as high histologic grade (P < 0.001), negativity for estrogen and progesterone receptors (P < 0.001), positivity for HER2 status (P < 0.001), high tumour cell proliferation by Ki-67 (P < 0.001), and a basal-like phenotype (P < 0.001). Among molecular subtypes, HER2 positive breast carcinomas showed the highest VPI (P < 0.001). High VPI was significantly associated with adverse outcome in univariate and multivariate survival analysis (P = 0.006, P = 0.004, respectively). Conclusion: Microvascular proliferation is a novel marker of active angiogenesis and is highly associated with aggressive features in breast cancer. Objective: Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are a heterogeneous set of tumours characterized by absence of actionable therapeutic targets. Increased aggressiveness of TNBC, as well as a resistance to standard therapies, may be associated with the presence of cancer stem cell (CSC) populations within the tumour, the role of which and a prognostic value in TNBC is still debatable. Method: We analised the relationships between CD44/CD24 CSC cell phenotype, expression of tenascin-C, described as an extracellular marker for CSC niche, parameters of tumour progression and a pathologic response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We evaluated TNBC specimens of 30 patients who received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with platinum agents. The protein expression of CD44, CD24 and tenascin-C was detected by immunohistochemistry. Results: Our results didn't reveal any correlation between CSC markers and tumour characteristics, such as Ki-67, nodal status and distant metastasis. Tenascin-C was found to be highly associated with the CD44+/ CD24-/low phenotype and a chemotherapy sensitivity. All tumour cases where CD44+/CD24-/low phenotype combined with a prominent tenascin-C expression had a poor pathologic response and exhibited the chemotherapy resistence. All other pattern combinations of CSCs markers didn't relate to negative response to chemotherapy. Conclusion: Our results highlighted a potential prognostic role for CD44+/CD24-/low/ tenascin-C+ tumour phenotype in TNBC resistance to neoadjuvant chemotherapy with platinum agents. Objective: Angiosarcoma is a rare complication of radiation therapy (RT) for breast cancer. Knowledge of its epidemiology and natural history is useful for multi-disciplinary breast management teams, but not readily available in the literature. Aims: To present a case of radiation-induced angiosarcoma and synthesize evidence on incidence, relative risk (RR), number needed to harm (NNH), and prognosis of radiation-induced angiosarcomas and atypical vascular lesions (AVL) of the breast. Method: A 10 year evidence search was conducted using DynaMed and MEDLINE. Results: We present a case of breast angiosarcoma in a 77-year old woman 12 years after RT for invasive lobular carcinoma. The evidence search identified 119 references; 8 contained extractable numeric information at evidence level 3 (Oxford system). We calculated relative risk of post-radiation breast angiosarcoma of 3 to 6 and number needed to harm of 1500 to 3000, after a median latency of 7 years. The prevalence of radiation-induced breast angiosarcoma is 36/1000, compared to 6/1000 for primary breast angiosarcoma. Objective: We evaluated immunohistochemical expression of EMT and CSC markers in PTs in relation to their expression to various clinicopathological parameters and survival outcomes. Method: Immunohistochemistry was performed on 360 PTs using tissue microarray sections. The expression of molecules related to EMT (S100A4) and CSCs (ALDH1) was assessed in stromal cells of tumours. Biomarker expression was correlated with clinicopathological parameters and disease free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) calculated. Results: 360 tumours were assessed. Of these 241 (67 %) tumours were benign, 87 (24.2 %) borderline and 32 (8.9 %) malignant. Stromal expression of ALDH1 and S100A4 was observed in 52.5 and 22.5 % of cases. Combined expression of both markers was seen in 13.3 % of tumours. Tumour grade, stromal cell atypia and increased stromal mitoses were associated with increased expression of ALDH1 and S100A4 (p < 0.001). Patients whose tumours expressed ALDH1disclosed a trend of poorer OS but this was not statistically significant (p = 0.160) whereas a near significant decrease in OS was noted in patients whose tumours coexpressed ALDH1 and S100A4 (p = 0.065). Conclusion: Determination of EMT and CSC markers provides significant biological insights into breast PTs. These markers may promote new therapeutic paradigms in management, especially for malignant PTs. Objective: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), which is characterized by no specific molecular targeted agents. Nicotinamide has been proven to have protective effects in reducing the rate of skin cancer without toxicity. Method: The Illumina sequencing (Hiseq 2500) and iTRAQ LC-MS/MS techniques were employed for transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, respectively, of TNBC cells treated with and without 25 mM nicotinamide. Obtained samples were utilized in network-based approaches to identify altered representative molecules of such pathways. In vitro functional tests were conducted to evaluate biologic functions in a cell. Results: By KEGG enrichment analysis of the transcriptome, seven pathways, including those of chemokines, metabolism and growth factor binding sites, cell cycle, DNA repair, and apoptosis, showed significant differential expression of genes between the two groups. KEGG enrichment analysis showed that among the 5028 proteins identified, 346 and 168 genes showed altered expression and pathway network interactions were derived between the differentially expressed genes. In vitro functional experiments validated the results of the Omics analysis. Conclusion: This study highlights the landscape of genetic and protein alterations after nicotinamide treatment in TNBCs by identifying alterations in numerous molecular pathways of nicotinamide and provides a rationale for identification of a therapeutic drug for TNBC. Next generation proteomic analysis reveals suppression of Bmi-1 mediates molecular pathways for inhibiting tumour progression in triple negative breast cancer Objective: Bmi-1 has been correlated with tumour aggressiveness. Clinical trials with Bmi-1 inhibitors are currently underway. However, much still remains unknown regarding the landscape of genomics and proteomic molecular pathways in triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), which is characterized by no specific molecular targeted agents. Method: We conducted proteomics of TNBC cells treated with or without a Bmi-1 siRNA by using the iTRAQ LC-MS/MS technique to identify differentially expressed proteins between the two groups. Enrichment analysis was conducted and biological network analysis was performed Finally, the selected proteins were validated for their clinical significance in a TNBC tissue microarray (n = 319). Results: Among the 7890 proteins identified, 722 differentially expressed proteins were obtained. By Panther analysis, 13 pathways, including those for kinases and the cell cycle, showed significant differential expression between the two groups. Pathway networks from functional interactions revealed tumour suppressive networks mediated by Bmi-1 suppression. Increased expression of Bmi-1 related proteins was related to aggressive clinical course. Conclusion: These findings shed light on the complex mechanisms underlying Bmi-1 by using proteomic analysis and provide pilot data necessary to support the role of Bmi-1 in TNBC and the application of a Bmi-1 inhibitor as a potential therapeutic to target TNBC. Objective: Initially, an inverse association was described between HER-2 positivity and the presence of hormonal receptor (HR), but subsequently it was reported that 50 % of the patients with HER-2 positive tumours are also HR positive. (J Natl Cancer Inst 2003; 95:142-153) (1), 6-9 (2), ≥10 (3). Final score for benign was ≤5, low grade malignant PT was 6-9 and ≥10 for high grade malignant PT. Both the WHO and modified system documented that after excluding incomplete excisions none of the benign PTs recurred. All 38 high grade PTs were equally classified by both systems, 7 PTs labeled as low grade by WHO were labeled as benign by modified system and two labeled as low grade by modified system were labeled as benign by WHO but none of discrepant cases had recurrence or death. A slightly better prediction of death was seen with modified system then traditional WHO classification. Conclusion: Though the WHO classification predicts events accurately, our study indicates that prediction may improve with addition of scores and heterogeneity and cellularity. Results: In all examined sections we discovered cells that were inside of another cells. With the help of scanning electron microscope the localization of internalized cell within "cannibal"-cell in homotypical CC was proven. Entosis is defined by invasion of one tumour cell inside the other, with forming of vacuole in cytoplasm of the absorbing cell. Internalized cell has a round shape. Internalized cell localizes inside gigantic vacuole in cytoplasm of a host-cell. Nucleus of a host-cell has a crescent form and dislocated to the periphery of cytoplasm. Later cells dissapear by means of lysosomal degradation. In some cases internalized cells undergo cell division within cannibal cell or they can be released. Entosis is provoked by the loss of attachment to extra-cellular matrix(ECM), that leads to internalization of one sell within the other by means of actin-myosin contraction. Generally, the result of entosis is a lysosome-mediated degradation of internalized cell or,in some cases their release from the host-cell. Objective: Immunohistochemical analysis of expression features, distribution and interaction of E-cadherin and β-catenin proteins in primary tumours of mammary gland. Method: Immunohistochemistry Results: In our test group there were 32 (n = 32) matching cases(primary mammary gland tumours) and their metastases in lymphatic nodes (n = 4) and liver (n = 8). Expression of Ecadherin, β-catenin in mammary gland cancer cells was defined by of immunohistochemical method with specific antibodies usage. In our resaerch we discovered that reduction and total absence of E-cadherin expression more frequently occured in mammary gland cancer patients with developed in different periods metastases in liver (70 %) than patients without metastases (30 %) (p = 0,014). The increase of cytoplasmic immunoreactivity and nuclear translocation of β-catenin was found in more than 80 % mammary gland cancer cases, following the development of metastases. Conclusion: These changes in E-cadherine and β-catenin expression in tumour cells can be considered as factors of unfavorable prognosis in mammary gland cancer. β-catenin expression appearance indicates signaling pathway activation, which is triggered by aberrant expression of epithelial cadherins, which leads to the increase of mobility and invasion of tumour cells. Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of PD-L1 by 3 different immunohistochemical antibodies in TNBC. Method: Interpretation of all three PD-L1 antibodies showed good concordance among three readers (kappa value >0.610) in both cancer cells and immune cells. Using a tissue microarray (TMA) constructed from 218 cases of TNBC, we performed immunohistochemical staining using 3 the most popular commercially used PD-L1 monoclonal antibodies (clones 28-8, E1L3N, and SP142) in cancer cells and immune cells. Results: Using various cut-off values of previous studies (1, 5, 10 , and 50 %), the expression rates in cancer cells were: PD-L1 (E1L3N) (14.7, 14.7, 11 .0, 2.3 %), PD-L1 (28-8) (13.3, 12.4, 10.1, 1.8 %), and PD-L1 (SP142) (11.5, 11.0, 6.9, 0.5 %), respectively. At the 5 % cut-off value, the discordance rate among the three antibodies was 6.0-10.6 % and was highest between PD-L1 (SP142) and the other two antibodies. The expression rates in immune cells were PD-L1 (E1L3N) (37.6 %), PD-L1 (28-8) (36.7 %), and PD-L1 (SP142) (19.3 %), and the discordance rate among the three antibodies ranged from 13.8 to 24.8 % and was also highest between PD-L1 (SP142) and the other two antibodies. Conclusion: PD-L1 detection in cancer cells and immune cells varied by antibody clone. The concordance rate among monoclonal PD-L1 antibodies was higher between PD-L1 (28-8) and PD-L1 (E1L3N). Objective: Intratumour heterogeneity denotes the coexistence of subpopulations of tumour cells that differ in their characteristics within the primary tumour and metastasis. Cell clones evolving independently from each other leading to the spatial and temporal heterogeneity. of this study was to evaluate the inter-and intratumour heterogeneity of breast cancer (BC) using standard IHC characteristics (ER, PgR, Her2/neu and Ki67). Method: We studied 20 primary BC, cT2N0 and 10 BC and metastasis cT2N1/2 using 7-punched core-biopsy. Tumour type, grade and immunostaining were analyzed by three pathologists. Results: No heterogeneity of tumour type or grade was evaluated, concordance between experts was 100 %. Intraclass correlation coefficient between immunostaining measured by different pathologists were high (0, 94); the lowest (0,89) were obtained in Ki67 expression. Intratumour heterogeneity of ER-expression was observed in 8/30 primary cases (26 %) and in 2/10 (20 %) cT2N1/2 tumours, PgR-expression-in 12/ 30 (40 %) and 6/10 (60 %) respectively, were higher in percentage than in intensity for both markers. Intratumour heterogeneity of Ki67 expression was observed in 17/30 primary cases (56 %) and in 1/10 (10 %) of cT2N1/2; HER2-in 4/30 (13 %) and in 0/30 respectively. Conclusion: Intratumour heterogeneity should be manshioned when BC is diagnosed, it is important to study optimal volume of tissue. Multiple subcutaneous papillomas of the chest caused by needle tract seeding from the breast T. Nakai * , S. Ichihara, M. Sanada, T. Fujii, Y. Ohta, T. Wakasa, M. Yukawa, C. Ohbayashi * Nara Medical University, Dept. of Pathology, Japan Objective: Iatrogenic epithelial cell displacement in the breast is a recently described complication of needle procedures. However the fate of the tiny epithelial fragments displaced in the needle tract remains unknown. Here we describe a case of multiple subcutaneous papillomas of the chest presumably caused by needle tract seeding from recurrent mammary papillomas. Method: Morphological, topological, immunohistochemical (CK5/6, ER, CD10, p63) and molecular (Mitochondria DNA D-loop direct sequence) features are compared between subcutaneous and mammary papillomas. Results: After 4 needle manipulations during 16 months, the patient underwent wide local excision for the mass in the right breast. The resected tissue revealed a mammary papilloma measuring 19.5 mm (A) and two subcutaneous papillomas measuring 10.5 and 8.5 mm (B), which situated in the same straight line. Two year later, she underwent an excisional biopsy which contained a subcutaneous papilloma measuring 3 mm (C). These three papillomas (A,B,C) were identical in morphology, topology, immunohistochemistry and molecular features. Conclusion: 1) Our results indicate that the subcutaneous papillomas develop from the needle tract seeding from the breast papilloma. Awareness of such a phenomenon is important in diagnosing papillomas in an unusual location because such lesions may lead to confusion about its malignant potential, histogenesis, terminology and treatment if the patients' past history of needle procedure is missed. 2) The cystic spaces that contain the papillomas are not necessarily the preexisting ducts or lobules but may be newly generated by the stem cells of papilloma. A mechanism analogous to "ductneogenesis" for ductal carcinoma in situ proposed by Tibor Tot (2007) may also work in papillary lesions of the breast. Objective: Nowadays the anti-tumour effects of some natural plant foods are extensively studied. One of them, oregano is rich in phenolic compounds and monoterpenoids with high antioxidant capacity. The effects of lyophylized oregano were evaluated in N-methyl-N-nitrosoureainduced mammary carcinogenesis in female Sprague-Dawley rats. Method: Animals were randomly divided into three experimental groups (n = 25 per group): 1/ control group without chemoprevention; 2/ group with chemoprevention with oregano at a concentration of 0.3 %; and 3/ at concentration of 3 %. The experiment was terminated after 14 weeks of carcinogen exposal. Various macroscopic (tumour-bearing animals, tumour frequency, incidence and latency, tumour volume), histological (tumour type, grade) and immunohistochemical parameters (caspase-3, Bax, Bcl-2, Ki67, VEGF, VEGFR and some cancers stem cell markers) were evaluated. Results: In both treated groups histology was similar and demonstrated decrease in the ratio of high-/low-grade carcinomas compared to control group. In group with 0,3 % of oregano there was reduced tumour frequency by 55,5 %, tumour incidence by 44 %, and tumour volume by 44.5 % compared to control group. Immunohistochemistry confirmed in both treated groups decreased expression of VEGFR-2, CD24 and EpCAM and increased positivity of caspase-3. Moreover, the lower dose group had decreased proliferative activity and the group with 3 % of oregano had increased latency by 12.5 days and decreased expression of Bcl-2. Conclusion: Results our study show a distinct tumour-suppressive effects of oregano in the breast cancer model characterized by antineoplastic impact on tumour stem cells, as well as pro-apoptotic, antiangiogenic and antiproliferative activity in breast cancer. Objective: The surgical excision of breast cancer liver metastasis (BCLM) is a relative uncommon procedure. Consequently, the report of the histological features of the regression of BCLM after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACh) is almost unknown. Method: We report the case of a patient with BCLM confirmed by biopsy with histological complete regression after NACh with features of a regenerative hepatic nodule. Results: A 43 years-old woman was diagnosed with a cT2 N0, G3, breast invasive carcinoma, estrogen receptors positive (100 %) progesterone receptors negative, ERBB2 3+, with a synchronous liver metastasis with 16 mm by ultrasonography, confirmed by biopsy. After NACh, the liver metastasis reduced to 10 mm by ultrasonography, and the patient underwent hepatectomy and breast lumpectomy. Histologically, a breast tumour bed with 6 mm with 5 % of overall cancer cellularity, and a 10 mm hepatocellular nodule with steatohepatitis and regenerative features, were found. Posterior radiologic evaluation of the liver confirmed the surgical excision of the metastatic nodule. The patient is alive and well 6 months after surgery. Conclusion: We illustrate a regenerative hepatic nodule as a form of total BCLM regression. The histologic re-evaluation of BCLM after NACh may be as important as the re-evaluation of the primary tumour to appraise the degree of regression. Objective: Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a heterogenous group of tumours that are in need of potential markers for specific therapies. In this study, we aimed to detect the expression levels of GATA3 and Fli-1 (nuclear transcription factor) in TNBC, and the relationship of these levels with clinicopathological parameters. Method: The study included 53 TNBC examined during 5 years. Fourty eight cases, whose blocks were available, were stained with GATA3 and Fli-1 immunohistochemically. A H-score was detected for each tumour, between 0 and 300. Results: We detected nuclear positivity in 71,4 and 85,7 % of tumours with GATA3 and Fli-1, respectively. There was a statistically significantly positive relationship between GATA3 and Fli-1 H-score. Cases with higher Fli-1 H-score relapsed sooner. Cases younger than 40 years and cases with lymph node metastasis had statistically significantly higher GATA3 H-score comparing those cases older than 40 years and cases without lymph node metastasis, respectively. We couldn't determine any relationship between other pathological parameters and GATA3 as well as Fli-1. Conclusion: Fli-1 may cooperate with GATA3 on the same pathway. GATA3 may be a marker to determine TNBC with potential metastases to axillary lymph nodes. Fli-1 may be a marker to give information about relapse time. Results: Fifteen patients were included. NADH was positive in 12/12 pre-RFA and negative in 9/12 post-RFA. CK18 was positive in 14/15 pre-RFA and negative (10) or focally positive (4) IPO-Porto (2000 . Clinicopathological data was retrieved. All slides were re-evaluated. Immunohistochemistry study with hormonal receptors (ER, PR, AR), HER2 and GCDFP-15, and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for ETV6 gene rearrangements was performed. Results: Five cases were identified: all female; median age: 57 years (range 41-75); median tumour size: 16 mm (range 8-25); 4 cases were Nottingham grade1 and one was grade2. All presented ETV6 rearrangement. ER expression was low (1-10 %) in 3 cases; 2 cases were triplenegative. AR was negative in 4 cases and one had low expression (1-10 %). All were positive for GCDFP-15. Initial treatment was surgical (4 lumpectomy with radiotherapy and 1 mastectomy); sentinel lymph node was negative in all patients. One patient was submitted to additional chemotherapy and two to hormonotherapy. All remain diseasefree(median follow-up 36 months, range 21-108). Conclusion: SBC is a rare breast carcinoma with specific histological and genetic features, usually with favorable prognosis. Traditionally seen as a triple-negative low grade carcinoma, there are increasing reports of higher histological grades, low expression of hormonal receptors(ER and AR) and positivity for GCDFP-15. Our series also parallels the treatment heterogeneity reported, precluding conclusive statements on its effectiveness. Objective: "Digistain" is a new and validated imaging technology that enables the quantification of a newly conceived biomarker that is present in routinely processed, and unstained FFPE sections. By using a unique optical signature to analyse the chemical make-up of the biopsy quantitatively, the technique circumvents the subjectivity inherent in grading. Within minutes of loading a slide it yields a highly reproducible and user independent numerical score reflecting the Nuclear: Cytoplasmic ratio. We term this the Digistain Index (DI Objective: Compare the prognostic factors, the overall survival (OS) and the recurrence-free survival (RFS) between Sarcoma phyllodes of the breast (SP) and Non-phyllodes primary breast sarcoma (NPS). Method: A retrospective study conducted at the Institute Salah Azaïz between 2004 and 2013 has allowed to collect 18 SPs and 12 NPSs. We studied the correlation between these histological subtypes and the clinicopathological criteria. Results: An analytical study of the parameters age, tumour size, mammographic features, presence or absence of metastases and locoregional recurrence showed no correlation with histological type (p > 0,05). In univariate analysis, the median OS was 10 months for SP against 60 months for NPS. The influence of the histological type was not significant (p = 0,08). RFS was 7 months for SP and 23 months for the NPS. The influence of the histological type was not significant (p = 0,081). In multivariate analysis, the retained independent prognostic factors for OS were age (p = 0,06) and tumour necrosis (p = 0,02). Conclusion: The same therapeutic strategies must be indicated for SP and NPS. Surgical treatment is the most important. The role of radiotherapy and chemotherapy are debated. Increasing diagnostic accuracy of fibroadenoma and benign phyllodes tumour in core biopsy using histopathologic scoring system W. Yusnita * , E. Hardjolukito, P. Wuyung * Bhayangkara R.S Sukanto Hospital, Anatomical Pathology, Jakarta, Indonesia Objective: Fibroadenoma is very difficult to differentiate from benign phylllodes tumour especially in core biopsy. This study was aimed to identify histopathological features needed to differentiate those tumours and to verify whether using scoring system on those histological features will improve diagnostic accuracy in core biopsy. Method: 57 cases with paired core biopsy and excision/mastectomy with diagnosis of fibroadenoma and benign phyllodes tumour were included in this Study. Reassessment of histological features were done blindly, with and without scoring system, and excision/mastectomy served as the gold standard. Histopathologic features which assessed were stromal cellularity, nuclear atypia, tissue fragmentation, fat infiltration, mitotic figure, stromal heterogeneity. The scoring system were very mild (0), mild (1), moderate (2) for stromal cellularity and nuclear atypia; low (1), moderate (2), marked (3) for mitosis; none (1) and present (2) for fat infiltration, stromal heterogeneity and tissue fragmentation. Analytical statistic, diagnostic test and accuracy test were done. Results: Stromal cellularity, stromal heterogeneity and tissue fragmentation mostly found in benign phyllodes tumour compare to fibroadenoma (p = 0,001; p = 0,000; p = 0,021). The Specificity in scoring system increased by 17,9 % whereas positive predictive value, negative predictive value and accuracy increased in scoring system (11,9 and 5,1 %) . Area under curve increased by 8,9 %. Conclusion: Scoring system improve the diagnosis accuracy of fibroadenoma and phyllodes tumour as shown by the increasing specificity, positive predictive value, accuracy and AUC. This can be used as reference to diagnose and differentiate fibroadenoma and benign phyllodes tumour especially in core biopsy. Results: Loss of E-cadherin expression was found in 2 (4 %) cases. We observed cytoplasmic β-catenin staining in 16 (32 %) cases, p120-catenin-in 50 (100 %) cases. Coexpression of E-and P-cadherins was found in 48 (96 %) cases. The correlation was determined between β-catenin and p120-catenin (V = 0.32, p < 0.05), PR (V = 0.32, p < 0.05), HER-2 (V = 0.20, p < 0.05); p120-catenin and PR (V = 0.28, p < 0.05). The results speak about appearance of aberrant P-cadherin expression connected with E-cadherin expression in Luminal B (HER-2 positive) subtype of breast cancer, destruction of cadherin-catenin complexes and release of β-and p120-catenin molecules which activate signaling pathways leading to increase of motility, migration, invasion and proliferation of breast cancer cells. overall degenerative alterations showed a higher prevalence of translamellar mucoid extracellular matrix accumulation (T-MEMA), laminar collapse and severe elastic fibre fragmentation. Patients with mixed alterations were older and presented a higher prevalence of translamellar collagen increase (TCI). Non-significant differences were found between the two subgroups with respect to 6-year mortality and major aorta related events, although the mixed group showed a trend to a poorer prognosis. Objective: Aortopathy refers to non-atherosclerotic and noninflammatory changes that occur in the media, which are implicated in producing several thoracic aortic diseases. These not only occur in the young population, but are also devastating and fatal. We present our experience on aortic excisions for aortopathy over a period of 8 years. were reviewed and cases of PTD (ages < 18 years) were retrieved. Demographic characteristics and clinical features were noted. The pattern of involvement of the aorta was classified as localized, multifocal or diffuse. Results: Of the 55 cases of Takayasu's disease diagnosed at autopsy in 25 years, 23 patients were less than 18 years of age (range of 2 to 18 years, mean of 9.3 years) and included 10 males and 13 females. Four cases had been diagnosed in the ante-mortem period. Localized disease was seen in 11 cases; arch localization in 3 and thoraco-abdominal localization in 8. Multifocal disease was seen in 5 cases, while 7 had diffuse disease. The manifestations were varied, but common modes of presentation included chest or abdominal pain, hypertension, fever, breathlessness, vomiting. Seven cases showed active disease. Pulmonary artery and/or coronary artery involvement was seen in 10 cases. Three children had concomitant rheumatic heart disease. Conclusion: PTD is a rare entity with varied manifestations in different populations. It often remains unsuspected. Autopsy studies can establish the diagnosis in unsuspected cases and improve the understanding of this disease. Persistence of left ventricular myocardial sinusoids in an infant S. Singaravel * , P. Vaideeswar * Seth GS Medical College, Dept. of Pathology, Mumbai, India Objective: The fetal heart initially has a sinusoidal vascular pattern. Epicardial mesenchymal cells undergo vasculogenesis to form the right and left coronary arteries, which eventually connect to the aorta. As the vasculogenesis process is completed, the myocardium is compacted and the primitive sinusoids disappear. Method: We present the case of a female 10 month old infant with high grade fever and increased respiratory activity for one day. She had a history of past admissions with similar complaints at 7 and 9 months of age. The heart rate was 170/minute and respiratory rate was 68/minute. Bilateral coarse crepitations were auscultated. A clinical impression was acute bronchiolitis. The child expired within 24 h. Results: At autopsy the heart was globular in shape with biventricular dilatation (left more than right). Microscopically, features of dilated cardiomyopathy were seen. In addition, dilated endothelium-lined sinusoids were seen in the myocardium of the posterior and lateral walls but no connection could be demonstrated with the ventricular cavity or the epicardial coronaries. The lungs showed changes of bronchopneumonia. Conclusion: Persistent myocardial sinusoid of the left ventricle is very rare, and may result in abnormal wall motion or ischemia due to coronary steal phenomenon. Objective: The objective of the study is to investigate effects of acute, high glucose (HG, 20 mM)-induced changes in mitochondrial membrane potential on cardiomyocyte resistance to oxidative stress. Method: Metabolic effects of HG were tested in freshly isolated rat cardiomyocytes by measuring: oxygen consumption, NAD(P)H fluorometry, generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial membrane potential, opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) and cell survival. Cells were preconditioned with isoflurane (APC). Results: HG increased oxygen consumption, NAD(P)H production and mitochondrial membrane potential, which indicated rapid metabolism of excess glucose by cardiomyocytes. This was associated with elevated production of ROS, accelerated opening of mPTP and increased H2O2-induced cell death. Uncoupling agent dinitrophenol reversed HG-induced mitochondrial hyperpolarization, reduced ROS production and reversed cytotoxicity to cytoprotection by HG. Hyperosmotic mannitol control moderately elevated ROS production and exerted cytoprotection. HG prevented APC-induced mitochondrial depolarization and abrogated APC-induced cytoprotection. Conclusion: HG acutely hyperpolarizes mitochondria leading to excessive ROS production that is detrimental to cardiomyocytes and abolishes APC. Reduction of ROS production by preventing mitochondrial hyperpolarization exerts cytoprotection probably via small amount of ROS that trigger preconditioning. Methods of estimation myocardial remodelling in cardiopathy S. Poletaeva * , D. Rozumniy, A. Suvorov, Y. Yunusova * Samara Medical University, General and Clinic Pathology, Russia Objective: Pathology anatomy of cardiovascular diseases dominates in routine work of pathologist. Implementation of new surgery interventional methods of treatment requires to diagnose degree of involvement cardiac remodeling in thanatogenesis. The aim of our study is objectivization and documentation special morphological aspects of cardiac remodeling due to hypoxic, ischemic and diabetic cardiopathy. Method: Autopsy material of hearts from newborns (n = 35), under-1 children (n = 32) with hypoxic cardiopathy, from patients 65-75-yearsold, died from ischemic (n = 37) and diabetic (n = 35) cardiopathy was analyzed. Comparison groups were hearts of newborns (n = 6), under-1 children (n = 4) and 60-76-years-old adults (n = 9), who were died from accidents resulting in injuries. Macroscopic investigation, separately weighing, computer morphometry and 3D-modelling were performed. Results: Total heart weight and sizes were significantly enlarged in relation to the same parameters in comparison groups, but cardiac remodelling is performed by different heart chambers: in cases of hypoxic cardiopathy in newborns and under-1 children-by right ventricle, in cases of hypoxic cardiopathy in adults-by left ventricle realized in dilatation type, in cases of diabetic cardiopathy in adults-by left ventricle realized in hypertrophic type. Conclusion: 3D-modelling offers the possibility to get significant dates, to prognose type of cardiopathy and estimate its involvement in thanatogenesis. Results: In all patients there was a sharp increase of the SHG signal at the outer layers. In dissected aortas this region formed the external border of the blood channel. Furthermore, in these patients we noticed an important loss of SHG signals in all layers. Conclusion: Non-centrosymmetric collagen might be an important element for the srenght and resistance of the aorta. During dissection the outer layers prevent complete vessel rupture, probably due to their increased content of non-centrosymmetric collagen. The overall decreased content of SHG-collagen in dissected aortas might be the cause, but also the consequence of the dissection process. A novel method to obtain endothelial cells from coronary arteries in situ for diagnostic purposes A. V. Tarasov Method: A total of 64 patients with acute coronary syndrome who underwent stenting of the coronary arteries were studied. After the intervention, the surfaces of the balloon angioplasty catheters were used as probes for obtaining cells from the coronary arteries. The cells were studied on LBC and further characterized using immunocytochemistry. Results: About 500, mostly polygonal non-nucleated cells with immunocytochemical features of endothelial cells and scant components of atherosclerotic plaque as for instance cytoplasm of smooth muscle cells and cellular detritus of atherosclerotic lipid core were identified from the surface of each balloon catheter. Conclusion: During balloon angioplasty, only a small amount of cellular material could be obtained from the surface of the arterial walls. But by identifying the presence of cells of atherosclerotic core on LBC preparations it is possible to confirm the presence of a ruptured plaque and to take prompt clinical action accordingly. Objective: Aortic aneurysms are very uncommon in infants and are regarded as connective tissue disorder. We experienced an unusual fetal case of a giant aortic arch aneurysm. Method: We described an aortic arch aneurysm associated with Fallot's tetralogy. These malformations were detected in a female fetus at 23 weeks of gestation. The pregnancy was not terminated and the infant was born at 38 weeks. She died at the first day of life because of cardiac failure. A complete autopsy was achieved. Results: On macroscopic examination, a giant assymmetric fusiform aneurysm involved the aortic arch. It measured 7 cm in length. Upon opening, the aortic aneurysm was surprisingly multilocular with thickned walls. On microscopic examination, the lesion was seen to be an aggregate of benign spindle cells with a myofibroblastic appearance. No inflammatory or specific degenerative changes were seen. In this fetus, the lesion was solitary, and the rest of the arterial system was normal. Conclusion: The combination of Fallot's tetralogy and aortic arch aneurysm has never been reported in the literature to our knowledge. The mechanisms underlying aortic aneurysm are incompletely understood. But, the aspect of the aneurysm in our case suggests that it arises from hamartoma. Objective: To determine prognostic criteria for pituitary adenoma depending on hormone production. Method: We studied the hormonal state and Ki-67 prolifirative index in 142 patients with pituitary adenomas. MRI was used to estimate the tumour size and to monitor its growth. Tumours exceeding 10 mm in size were defined as macroadenomas, and those smaller than or equal to 10 mm as microadenomas. Immunohistochemical staining was carried out with anti-bodies against Ki-67 and 6 pituitary hormones. Results: Macroadenomas were mainly mammosomatotropinomas or gonadotropinomas with tumour with invasive growth and recurrence. Proliferative activities of micro-and macroadenomas were not significantly different. The average size of recurrent adenomas was 29 ± 12 mm (the non-recurrent ones were 17,6 ± 10 mm, p < 0,001), their proliferative activities did not differ. The proliferative activity of invasive adenomas was significantly higher than in non-invasive. Gonadotropinomas were more often recurrent and demonstrated invasive growth without clinical signs of hormonal hypersecretion. Conclusion: Our study showed that the most part of gonadotropinomas did not have any clinical signs. In all the cases they were macroadenomas and often recurrent. The tumour proliferative activity more than 2,6 % can be used as a prognostic criterion only for gonadotropinomas. Objective: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTCa) is the most common form of malignant tumours of this organ, covering approximately 70 % in the structure of morbidity. One of important prognostic PTCa factors is pathological biomineralization. The purpose is to study morphological value of biomineralization in papillary thyroid cancer. Method: Histological, histochemical techniques and scanning electron microscopy with microanalysis and X-ray diffraction were used to study the samples of PTCa. Results: The first group of patients included 27 women and 3 men and the average age was 56.93 ± 2.18 years old. In patients with symptoms of mineralization the largest tumour size was 1,84 ± 0,13 cm, in seven cases metastases were found in peripheral lymph nodes. Patients, who had no signs of PTCa mineralization, made up the second group of 30 people-24 women and 6 men. The largest tumour size averaged 1,44 ± 0,09 cm (p < 0.07), in eight cases metastases were found in peripheral lymph nodes. Comparing the number of patients with metastases in both groups (7-Group I, 8-Group II) and describing the size of tumour, subject to presence and absence of metastases in patients (2,09 ± 0,2 cm and 1,31 ± 0,17 cm), there was significant difference found between indicators of clinical cases of studied groups (p < 0.02). Objective: The cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (CMV-PTC) is an unusual neoplasm usually associated with familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome (FAPS). The molecular pathogenesis of sporadic CMV-PTC is not completely understood. We investigate the typical mutations of sporadic thyroid tumours and mutations related with the WNT pathway in a series of 10 patients with CMV-PTC. Method: Out of the 10 patients, there were six sporadic cases (5 female, 1 male), three associated with FAPS (2 female, 1 male), and one without information. The mean age of patients was 32.2 years (range 18-45 years). Beta-catenin expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Sequencing analysis was used for screening of BRAF, NRAS, HRAS, KRAS, TERT, APC and CTNN1 gene mutations, and fluorescence in situ hybridization for detection of RET/PTC and PAX8-PPARgamma rearrangements. Results: Tumour cells showed cytoplasmic and nuclear staining for betacatenin in all cases. Somatic mutations were detected in APC (4 of 10 cases), AXIN1 (2/10), KRAS (1/8), and RET/PTC (1/2). No mutations were found in CTNN1 (0/9), BRAF (0/10), NRAS (0/10), TERT (0/4), HRAS (0/2), nor PAX8/PPARgamma (0/2). Conclusion: We describe for the first time the presence of AXIN1 mutations in CMV-PTC, and confirm the role of WNT signaling pathway molecular alterations in both sporadic and familial CMV-PTC. Objective: We report a case of syncron papillary thyroid carcinoma and myofibroblastic sarcoma. Although these tumours have different immunohistochemical pattern, we hypotethised that they share common origins. Method: Paraffin embedded tissue blocks, immunohistochemistry including Braf VE1 antibody. After macrodissection BRAF mutation analysis with COBAS 4800 BRAF V600 mutation test, also with inhouse method using mutation specific probe and melting point analysis followed by Sanger sequencing. Results: TTF1, PAX8 and CK8 scored positive on the papillary tumour but negative on the myofibroblastic sarcoma. The latter was also negative for S100 and p63, but positive for SMA and calponin. According to the immunohistochemistry these tumours were diagnosed as different syncron tumours. Mutation analysis showed the same BRAF mutation in both tumours. Conclusion: Presence of BRAF mutation in both tumours proposes that these tumours share same origin. Soft tissue tumours usually have no BRAF mutation, except for a low percentage of GIST, MPNST and histiocytic tumours. In our case sarcomatoid melanoma metastasis can be ruled out. Presence of BRAF mutation in both tumours proposes that these tumours share same origin and suggests that the myofibroblastic tumour is a dedifferentiated papillary tumour. Comparative study of mitotic count and Ki-67 proliferation index to grade pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour: Inter-observer agreement and correlation L. Scherman * , N. Ramdane, B. Carnaille, C. Do Cao, L. Dibombe, F. Renaud, E. Leteurtre * Lille, France Objective: Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour (P-NET) is a rare tumour with an increasing incidence and variable prognosis. Prognosis and treatment of P-NET depend on tumour grade, defined by mitotic count (MC) and/or Ki-67 proliferation index (KI). We compared different techniques evaluating these factors, to define the most time effective one. Method: 42 P-NET were retrospectively analysed. MC was assessed in 50HPF (10HPF = 2 mm 2 ) and reported as an average number of mitosis in 2 mm 2 . KI was counted manually on 2000 tumour cells. We evaluated inter-observer agreement for both methods, correlation between the two methods, correlation between both methods and KI assessed on a printed picture. Each method was timed. Results: Among 392 papillary carcinomas, we identified 29 Papillary microcarcinomas with extracapsular extension in 8 males and 21 females (mean age = 55 years). Tumour's size varied between 3 and 10 mm (mean = 8). All tumours were stage pT3a, nine bilateral and 15 multifocal. Vascular invasion and lymph node metastases were seen in 2 and 9 cases respectively. Tumour was encapsulated in 4 cases. Follicular structures and oncocytic features were seen in 20 and 9 cases respectively. Lymphocytic thyroiditis was observed in 13 cases. V600E-BRAF mutation was identified in all tested tumours (7/7 cases). One patient had early recurrence in regional lymph nodes. All patients are alive without evidence of thyroid cancer at 5 months-11 years of follow-up. Conclusion: Papillary thyroid microcarcinomas with extracapsular extension represent 7 % of papillary thyroid carcinomas in our series. This tumour is rarely encapsulated and can be associated with vascular invasion and lymph node metastases. V600E mutation is common. However, patient's prognosis seems to be excellent. Objective: Objective in this study is to assess current status in pathological diagnosis of NET in Japan, which will contribute to establish optimal diagnostic system. Method: We distributed questionnaire to 397 pathology laboratories and 144 institutions affiliated with the Japanese Society for Cancer of the Colon and Rectum. And current status of pathology diagnosis was assessed comprehensively. Colorectal NETs in these institutions were re-evaluated using WHO 2010 and collected to assess clinicopathological relationships. Results: Most institutions used formalin for fixation, but non-buffered formalin was used in 32.7 % of them. Fixation time was also variable. Most of NETs in Japan were diagnosed using routine immunohistochemistry and histochemistry. Vascular invasion was also diagnosed using them. On the other hand, mitotic count and Ki-67 index were assessed using less cell numbers and fields than those recommended by WHO. Time only to assess mitotic count and Ki-67 index took 18.0 to 27.3 min. From the data of collected 760 colorectal NETs, risk of lymph node metastasis in rectal NET was confirmed even in lesions smaller than 10 mm, and vascular invasion was important predictive factor. Conclusion: Our basic data will contribute to establish optimal pathological diagnosis and therapeutic system in the future. Objective: Molecular techniques have recently emerged as a potential valuable tool that could improve the diagnostic accuracy of thyroid FNA biopsy. The aim of our study was to investigate the feasibility of BRAFV600E point mutation detection using archived thyroid FNA smears (AT-FNAs). Method: Eleven AT-FNAs, corresponding to the Bethesda diagnostic categories II (n = 4), III (n = 2), IV (n = 3) and VI (n = 2) were included in our study (one smear/case). The DNA extraction protocol was based on a precipitation method (MasterPureTM DNA purification kit, Epicentre), according to the manufacturer instructions and optimized in our laboratory. All cases were subject to RT-PCR amplification and high resolution melting analysis for a housekeeping gene (GAPDH) and for BRAF gene, respectively. Results: We successfully isolated good quantity and purity DNA from all our cases (mean concentration 62.47 ± 37.55 ng/μl; mean purity: 1.47 ± 0.13). Moreover, the BRAFV600E point mutation could be specifically amplified in all these cases (2 positive, 9 negative), whereas the GAPDH target was amplifiable in all cases, except for two (DNA concentration 15.3 and 13 ng/μl, respectively). Objective: To establish the relationship between ATRX, HES1, mTOR, NOTCH1, PDGFR-β, VEGFR2 and MGMT expression with predictive significance on gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (GEP-NETs) and its correlation with microRNA expression (miR-19a, miR-96, miR-145, miR-182, miR-200a) . Method: A retrospective evaluation of the total samples diagnosed as GEP-NETs (period 2003 was conducted, clinical and pathological characteristics were evaluated in all cases. Biomarkers expression was assessed trough immunohistochemistry using tissue microarrays. Simultaneously, microRNAs that were possibly regulating biomarkers expression in small intestine and colon were identified applying a bioinformatic approach. For the 5 microRNAs identified we measured the expression by qRT-PCR. . Pathological data were retrieved from database registers and pathological reports, whereas follow-up data were obtained from the Department of Nuclear Medicine, "Ion Chiricu" Institute of Oncology, Cluj-Napoca. Results: Compared to E-FVPTCs, NE-FVPTCs revealed a higher rate of multifocality (p = 0.022, 31.7 % versus 21 %) and extrathyroidal extension (p < 0.0001, 11 cases, 7.6 % versus 3 cases, 1.4 %, all with capsular invasion, two with vascular invasion as well). A persistent disease status at the last oncological assessment and tumour recurrence were more frequent among patients with NE-FVPTCs (8.2 %, p = 0.046 and 0.9 %, p = 0.255, respectively). Only 1 patient (a case of NE-FVPTC) developed distant metastasis during follow-up (mean 66 months). Conclusion: NE-FVPTCs seem to present and behave in a more aggressive fashion, compared to E-FVPTCs. Understanding the differences between these entities will probably help guiding treatment strategies in the future. From breast to "endocrine brain": Objective: EGFR/HER1 and HER2 assessment related to hormone profile in pituitary adenomas. Method: 60 retrospective cases of pituitary adenomas, were routine stained for the histopathologic diagnosis, followed by case selection for immunoprofiling and EGFR and HER 2 assessment. Results: More than 1/3 of the examined pituitary adenomas (33, 33 %) were positive for HER2, exhibiting a membranar pattern in basophilic cells and a predominantly cytoplasmic, granular pattern in acidophilic cells. HER2 expression characterized PRL secreting adenomas (p = 0.005). Correlations between FSH-LH (p < 0.001) TSH-FSH (p = 0,024) and TSH-LH (p = 0.028) were significant. In situ hybridization confirmed HER2 gene amplification in 33, 34 % out of all HER2 positive cases. EGFR positivity was significant in GH-prolactin (p = 0.000) and prolactin-ACTH (p = 0.045) co-expressing pituitary adenomas, but also in the peritumoural macrophages and folliculostelate cells. Conclusion: Differential HER2 and EGFR expression correlated with the hormone profile may be used in order to define different subclasses of pituitary adenomas. Moreover, it could explain the prognostic and therapeutic heterogeneity that occurs in clinical practice. We support the reclassification of pituitary adenomas based on molecular mapping using well certified markers with prognostic and therapeutic impact. Objective: S100 Protein and GFAP in pituitary adenomas is less known, few correlations with other prognostic and/or therapeutic factors being available in this field. We aim to elucidate their involvement in the pathogenesis of pituitary adenomas and to correlate their expression with different growth factors and growth factor receptors. Method: 61 cases of pituitary adenomas were immunohistochemically assessed with GFAP and protein S100 in tumour cells and folliculostelate (FS) cells in close relationship with the hormone profile. Correlation with VEGF and EGFR expression, previously studied by our team, was also examined. Results: GFAP and protein S100 were expressed in tumour cells and FS cells. The morphology, distribution and density of GFAP+ FS cells and S100+ FS cells varied depending on the hormone profile. GFAP and protein S100 expression in tumour cells was significantly correlated with the hormone profile and with VEGF and EGFR expression. Conclusion: GFAP and protein S100 expression in tumour cells from pituitary adenomas depend on the hormone profile. We support the presence of two molecular subtypes of FS cells, GFAP+/VEGF+/S100 and GFAP-/S100+/EGFR+, simultaneously with the classical GFAP+/S100+ variant. S100+/EGFR+ pituitary adenomas may represent a unique group of aggressive tumours, highly capable of invasion and recurrence. Results: Thirty of 58 patients are Grade1, 10 Grade2, 10 Grade3 NET according to WHO2010 classification and 8 don't have residue tumour in resection material. Lymph node metastasis is observed in 13,3 % (4 cases) of G1NET cases. In these four cases with lymph node metastasis, the diameter of tumour is over 1 cm in three of them and the other smaller than 1 cm is invading to submucosa. Also age and male-to-female ratio are increasing with the increase in tumour stage. Four of 10 (%40) G2NET cases with closer Ki-67 proliferation index (%2-%5) to threshold between G1-G2 have lower stage. Conclusion: From this perspective, tumour diameter and depth of invasion are the points to consider in endoscopic follow-up process. In 2010 WHO classification the threshold for G1 and G2 distinction has a very narrow range, so it is needed to revise it again and reform the treatment algorithms. PS-03-032 FoxA1 expression in Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma D. Nonaka * Objective: FoxA1, also known as HNF-3A, regulates a variety of tissues during embryogenesis and early life. FoxA1 is reported to have oncogenic and tumour suppressive roles depending on tumour type. In thyroid, FoxA1 expression has recently been shown in C cells and medullary carcinoma (MTC) but not in follicular cells. FoxA1 has also been proposed as potential oncogene in anaplastic carcinoma (ATC). However, FoxA1 expression has not been extensively investigated in a spectrum of thyroid tumours. Method: 62 MTCs were stained with anti-FoxA1 antibody, and its expression pattern was compared with those of other conventional markers. FoxA1 was also performed on a variety of thyroid tumours. Objective: To identify by means of proteomic profiling novel prognostic biomarkers in lung carcinoids. Method: Two-dimensional electrophoresis was applied to screen differential proteomic profiles in typical (H727) and atypical (H720) lung carcinoid cell lines, and the most relevant differentially expressed proteins were identified using mass spectrometry (Maldi-TOF). Four of these latter (GSTP-1, HSP27, peroxiredoxin-2 and calreticulin), selected based on their biological properties and potential role in carcinogenesis, were validated using immunohistochemistry in a large cohort of 89 lung carcinoid paraffin embedded samples. Results: Over 150 proteins were differentially expressed in H727 as compared to H720 cells. Among these, 57 were identified by MaldiTOF and belonged to several cellular pathways. Among the four validated using immunohistochemistry, low GSTP-1, high nuclear HSP27 and low peroxiredoxin-2 expression were significantly associated with shorter survival at univariate analysis (all p < 0.02) and two of them with aggressive disease status (low GSTP-1, p < 0.001; high nuclear HSP27, p = 0.003). Interestingly, low GSTP-1 expression was significantly associated with poor outcome also in the group of atypical carcinoids, only. Conclusion: GSTP-1, HSP27 and peroxiredoxin-2 are novel candidate prognostic biomarkers identified by extensive proteomic profiling in lung carcinoids. Objective: Report on a series of patients with hydatid disease and specify the unusual locations of the cysts. Method: The records of patients diagnosed with hydatid disease in our hospital between 2005 and 2016 were analyzed, retrospectively. The cases were evaluated and specified by gender, age and the localization of the cysts. Results: A total of 329 patients diagnosed over a 10-year period were included in our study. There were 202 females (61.4 %) and 127 males (38.6 %). The hydatid cysts were located in the liver in 257 (78.1 %) patients and in unusual locations in 72 (21.9 %) patients. The most common unusual site for hydatid cysts was the spleen followed by bones, central nervous system, soft tissue, the kidney and the gall bladder. Amongst these 72 patients with hydatid cysts in unusual locations; 33 patients had comcomitant liver hydatidosis, whereas 39 patients had primary involvement of unusual sites. Two patients with malignancies also had hydatid cysts in different locations. Conclusion: Hydatid disease affects many organs in the body and therefore it can pose a major diagnostic dilemma and mimic other entities. In endemic areas, a differential diagnosis of hydatid disease should be considered for cystic masses in any location. Results: We had a total of 10 patients between the ages of 30-64 (average age 46,3), 4 of them were men and the others were women. The cysts outside of liver and lung were frequently seen in intramuscular (3/10), spleen (3/10), bone (2/10), kidney (1/10), retroperitoneal (1/10). The most frequent symptom in our patients was a progressive painless swelling for intramuscular cysts. The average cyst size was 7.8 cm. Histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis in all of the cases. Recurrence was seen in an intrabony lesion. Conclusion: Hydatid disease is still a serious public health problem in our country. Its clinical presentations vary depending on the involvement of the organ and the size of the cysts. The diagnosis is often suggested by radiology and confirmed by the pathological examination. Laparotomy showed right colonic mass with multiple lymphadenopathy. Right hemicolectomy was done and the specimen was sent for histopathology. The gross examination revealed thickening of the colonic wall with multiple lymph nodes ranging in size between 3 and 0.5 cm in maximum dimension. Microscopy showed a colonic wall with extensive infiltration by eosinophils and fungal hyphae surrounded by eosinophilic material and granulomatous inflammation (Splendore Hoeppli phenomenon). The fungal hyphae were positive to Periodic acid Schiff and Gomori's methenamine silver stains. Features were consistent with basidiobolomycosis, which was confirmed by microbiology. The two cases were treated by voricocanazole. Conclusion: Abdominal Basidiobolomycosis should be included in the differential diagnosis of patients presenting with fast growing abdominal mass and fever. Results: Out of 205 participants, 24 (11.7 %) were positive for Anti-HCV in which 13 (6.3 %) were male and 11 (5.3 %) were females. On the other hand 12 (5.8 %) were positive for HBsAg in which 9 (4.3 %) were males and 3 (1.4 %) were females. Whereas only 1 (0.4 %) was positive for both Anti-HCV & HBsAg. Out of these 24 Anti-HCV positive samples 17 (8.2 %) were also positive for HCV by PCR in which 8 were males (3.9 %) & 9 (4.3 %) were females & on the other hand out of 12 HBsAg positive samples 9 (4.3 %) samples were also positive for HBV by PCR in which 7 (3.4 %) were males & 2 (0.9 %) were females. Only 1 (0.4 %) sample were positive for both HCV & HBV by PCR. Conclusion: Our results indicates very high prevalence of HCV & HBV in this region. Which needs to be address immediately. Another interesting finding of this study is that the frequency of these infections are more in males as compare to females which might be due to the fact that males are more exposed to the high risk activities. Objective: Parasitic diseases, according to WHO, in more than 32 % of cases are the causes of deaths. In recent years, in the Republic of Kazakhstan a steady increase in the incidence of echinococcosis were noted (up to 1000 or more cases per year). We studied 215 cases of surgically treated liver echinococcosis. One hundred and seventy-nine patients were operated by traditional methods with an impact on residual cavity by various antiseptics. Thirty-six patients underwent an echinococcectomy with cavern sanitation by a physical method that we developed, with the use of underwater electrical discharge. Method: We conducted an intraoperative sampling of material for morphological study. Results: By electron microscopic study of Echinococcus cysts that were exposed to chemical attack it was found that all membrane structures of cells of germinal membrane of the hydatid cyst wall were intact and undergone minor changes. In the materials taken after physical method of sanitation of the residual cavity a complete destruction of all cellular elements of brood capsules of Echinococcus were detected. In the cellular detritus small membrane, vacuolar and granular fragments of nuclei and cytoplasm of necrotic cells were seen. From completely destroyed protoscolexes electron-dense debris of hooks and "ghosts" of vacuolated and ruined body components were remained. Conclusion: Physical method of sanitation of the residual cavity with underwater discharge at surgical treatment is effective in the prevention of recurrence of echinococcosis. This is confirmed by the materials of electron microscopic investigation. presented peliosis and perisinusoidal fibrosis. All 6(4.6 %) with NRH, 9(6.9 %) presenting Blue-Liver Syndrome (BL) and 8(6.1 %) with hepatic insufficiency were treated with OX. All but one in each category underwent a mayor or complex resection. Conclusion: Severe SOS and NRH are not frequent yet they are present. The only predictive factors for SOS, NRH, BL and/or hepatic insufficiency seems to be OX and the type of surgery performed. Surgeons should have special attention regarding these findings for recurred CLM. Results: Nuclear expression of EpICD significantly correlated with nuclear expression of β-catenin, and Ki-67 labeling index. In addition, nuclear expression of EpICD was associated with higher histologic grade and advanced T category. Forced overexpression of EpICD using EpICD cDNA in the HCC cell significantly increased the cell proliferation, migration and invasion. The overexpression of EpICD also increased the expression levels of the active form of β-catenin and c-myc and cyclin D1. Conversely, silencing of EpCAM by siRNA decreased the cell proliferation, migration, invasion and the expression of active form of βcatenin, c-myc and cyclin D1. Conclusion: Our present data suggest that nuclear EpICD plays important roles in HCC progression by modulating expression of target genes of EpCAM. Objective: Primitive giant cell tumour (GCT) of the common bile duct is very rare and share similar pathologic features with GCT of bone. Recently, H3F3A mutations were found as highly specific of GCT of bone. The aim of this study was to report a recent observation of GCT of the common bile duct, and to search for H3F3A mutations in the present case and in the pancreatic GCT we previously reported. Method: The bile duct tumour was fixed in 10 % neutral buffered formalin and included in totality in paraffin. Paraffin sections of the tumour were immunostained. Targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) on the 12 histone H3 genes was performed. Results: The patient (77-year-woman) presented a pedunculated polypoid mass in the common bile duct consisted of mononuclear histiocytic and stromal neoplastic cells with numerous giant cell stained by CD68 with no reactivity for keratin markers. NGS analysis showed no mutation in the 12 histone H3 genes, including the H3F3A gene recurrently mutated in GCT of bone. Objective: In acute pancreatitis (AP) five scoring systems have been identified, each one developed for a specific AP murine model and taking only in consideration individual parameters. The aim of this study was the development and validation of a histological score that stratifies the severity of AP severity in several murine models. Method: 26 Wistar rats were divided into three AP models (caerulein, duodenal occlusion and pancreatic duct occlusion). Animals were sacrificed at 10 and 24 h, depending on model. Lipase and amylase were measured to confirm AP. Histopathologic evaluation for edema, necrosis, inflammatory infiltrate, hemorrhage and vacuolization of acinar cells was performed and graded, and then stratified in four AP levels: none, mild, moderate and severe. The histologic score was correlated with C-reactive protein and procalcitonin. Results: Histological changes were observed in 62.5 % of animals. Of these, 87.5 % were classified as mild AP and 12.5 % as moderate. Moderate AP was found in the pancreatic duct occlusion model. There was correlation between histological changes and procalcitonin (p = 0.004). Conclusion: Preliminary results seem to validate the proposed histological score of AP. This score will allow greater uniformity of AP severity evaluation in murine models with application in different models for better understanding the AP pathophysiology. Conclusion: CLF is common in adult post-transplant liver biopsies affecting the majority of patients. CVE was the only significant histological feature associated with parenchymal fibrosis and centrilobular HSC activation indicating that it may play a role in activating HSCs in centrilobular areas contributing to CLF development. Histopathology of the liver in yellow fever after two months of infection: A case report with literature review V. Trak-Smayra * , C. Kanaan, D. Jaafar, R. Nasnas * Saint Joseph University, Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Beirut, Lebanon Objective: Yellow fever is a mosquito-borne flavivirus infection, prevalent in endemic areas and characterized by hemorrhagic fever and rapid deterioration of function of several organs including the liver. Death usually follows within few days of the onset. Few reports describe the liver lesions after the initial acute phase of the disease. We report the case of a 47 year old male patient, traveling to Angola, who presented to our hospital after two months of infection. The patient was diagnosed with yellow fever on the basis of fever, hematuria and jaundice with positive serological markers. After two month, he was admitted to our hospital for persistent elevation of liver enzymes and cholestasis. Therefore, a liver biopsy was performed. Results: Microscopic examination showed moderately active portal and lobular hepatitis with regenerative features, ballooning of the hepatocytes, giant cell transformation, hemosiderin laden macrophages and intracellular lipofuscin pigment. There was no evidence of intranuclear viral inclusions. These features were consistent with nonspecific hepatitis as described in surviving liver of yellow fever. Conclusion: Histological features of yellow fever are well known in the acute stages. In our case, we describe the state of the surviving liver at two month and we review the literature on the subject. Immunohistochemical expression of alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) in hepatocellular carcinoma from Egyptian patients and its relation to various clinicopathological parameters D. Maher * , D. El-Azab * National Liver Institute, Dept. of Pathology, Shebin El-Kom, Egypt Objective: To investigate tissue expression of α-SMA in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) from egyptian patients and to correlate its expression with various clinicopathological parameters of HCC. Method: Hematoxylin and eosin stained slides were re-evaluated in 62 HCC cases to assess tumour type, grade, stage, presence of lymphovascular invasion and the status of parenchymal margin (involved or not). Tissue Microarray construction (TMA) was constructed from paraffin embedded blocks (representative of the tumour) and 4-um sections of these tissue array blocks were cut and placed on positive charged slides and applied for immunostaining with α-SMA antibody. The α-SMA staining in the HSCs within the tumour stroma and perisinusoidal spaces was qualitatively classified into the following 4 groups compared with vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs): 0, no staining; +1, staining intensity considerably lower than VSMCs; +2, staining intensity lower than VSMCs; and +3, staining intensity similar to that of VSMCs. Also, α-SMA staining was quantitatively classified into the following 4 groups: 0, ≤1 positive cell/high power field (hpf); +1, <10 positive cells/hpf; +2, 10 20 positive cells/hpf; and +3, >20 positive cells/ hpf. Qualitative and quantitative classification was performed by a fellowship trained gastrointestinal pathologist without matching knowledge of the clinical data. For statistical analysis, grades 0 and +1 were categorized as low expression and grades +2 and +3 as high expression. Results: All cases of HCC were positive for α-SMA expression (100 %) in hepatic stellate cells from tumoural stroma. High quantitative (extensive) and qualitative (strong) expression of α-SMA was observed in 33 and 31 of the studied 62 HCC cases respectively, while low quantitative (sparse) and qualitative (weak) expression of α-SMA was observed in 29 and 31 of the studied 62 HCC cases respectively. Regarding the site of HCC, strong and extensive expression of SMA showed high significant association with HCC originating from Left lobes and also from both right and left lobes (P < 0.008 and P < 0.009) respectively. Strong expression of α-SMA appear to be associated with trabecular pattern of HCC but the association is statistically near significant (P = 0.08). Quantitative and qualitative of α-SMA expression failed to show any significant relationship with different clinicopathological parameters of HCC cases. Conclusion: Expression of Alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) was detected in all HCC cases, mainly those with trabecular pattern, so it may be used to differentiate HCC from other malignancies in liver whether primary or secondary. α-SMA expression has no relation to various clinicopathological parameters of HCC except for tumour site. The effect of imatinib in various thioacetamide-induced mouse liver fibrosis models A. Rókusz * , A. Szücs, E. Bugyik, V. Szabó, S. Paku, P. Nagy, K. Dezso * Semmelweis University, 1st Dept. of Pathology, Budapest, Hungary Objective: The deposition of collagenous extracellular matrix is an obligate consequence of chronic hepatic injury. The resulting fibrosis is mostly mediated by PDGF-driven hepatic myofibroblasts. Imatinib efficiently suppresses the activity of PDGFR, thus it is a promising candidate for the treatment of hepatic fibrosis. Method: Thioacetamide (300 mg/l) was given for 18 weeks to male C57Bl/6 wild type and transgenic mice, overexpressing TGF-β1 in the liver. In an additional "therapeutic" experiment thioacetamide was given to wild type mice for 27 weeks. For test animals imatinib was given daily (25 mg/kg per os; in the "therapeutic" experiment from the 19th week). The extent of fibrosis, ductular reaction, the proliferative activity of hepatocytes and ductular cells was monitored. Results: Imatinib treatment resulted in a transient inhibition of fibrosis progression in wild type mice, but failed to achieve this result in transgenic mice or the "therapeutic" experiment. In each group the extent of ductular reaction changed parallelly with the extent of fibrosis, while the proliferation of hepatocytes remained constant. Conclusion: Imatinib did not show lasting antifibrotic effect in wild type mice, and it was completely inefficient besides TGF-β1 overproduction or preceding fibrosis. The strong correlation between ductular reaction and fibrosis underlines their close relationship. Method: A 28-year-old male patient with a history of primary sclerosing cholangitis related cirrhosis was transplanted without any clinical sign or symptoms of tumour. Formalin fixed, paraffin embedded liver samples were analysed in detail. In situ hybridization (ISH) for the EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER) was also carried out. Results: Multiplex tumourous nodules were detected in the explanted liver. Histologically, the tumour was composed of two components: a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma and a lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma with sheets of undifferentiated epithelial cells and dense lymphoid stroma. Immunohistochemically, both components were positive for pancytokeratin and cytokeratin19. ISH for the EBER was also positive. Tumour cells did not stain with either Glypican-3 or Arginase-1 antibodies. Conclusion: As far as we know, this is the first case report of EBV-associated intrahepatic LEL-CC in an explanted liver. Although this tumour is not very common, based on literature data it is characterised by favourable overall survival. During the 2 years follow-up despite immunosuppressive therapy-without additional courses of chemotherapy-the patient did not show any evidence of tumour progression. Objective: Adrenomedullin (ADM) is a multifunctional neuropeptide which seems to play an immunomodulatory role in different inflammatory processes. Indeed, in a model of rheumatoid arthritis (known to be an autoimmune disease), the administration of ADM, reduced inflammatory damage and restored immune tolerance, by acting on regulatory T lymphocytes. This study aimed to evaluate the expression and the role of ADM in chronic inflammatory liver diseases (CILD), aspects that have never been investigated so far. Method: We assessed, by means of immunohistochemistry, the tissue expression of ADM in normal liver (10 cases) and in a series of 49 CILD, including 22 autoimmune and 27 viral, type C, hepatitis. Results: In normal liver, ADM was strongly and diffusely expressed in sinusoidal lining cells and in the hepatocytes. In CILD, ADM expression was less extensive and weaker in most cases. In particular, reduced ADM expression in sinusoidal cells was significantly associated with the autoimmune etiology (p = 0.01). Furthermore, a weaker sinusoidal expression of ADM significantly correlated with a more severe necro-inflammatory damage (p = 0.04). Conclusion: This study indicates that expression of ADM is under regulated in CILD, particularly of autoimmune etiology, suggesting that it may play an immunomodulant role even in this context. Nectin-1 expression in cancer-associated fibroblasts is associated with poor prognosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma K. Hirabayashi * , M. Yamada, A. Hadano, A. Kawanishi, Y. Takanashi, Y. Kawaguchi, T. Nakagohri, T. Mine, N. Nakamura * Tokai University, Dept. of Pathology, Isehara, Japan Objective: Nectins are cell adhesion molecules that regulate the formation of adherens junctions and tight junctions. In this study, the immunohistochemical expression of nectin-1 was assessed in tumour cells and in cancerassociated fibroblasts (CAFs) of the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Method: Immunohistochemistry for nectin-1 was conducted using tissue microarray blocks constructed from 258 resected cases of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. The immunohistochemical expression of nectin-1 in CAFs was compared with clinicopathological parameters. The percentage of nectin-1 expression in CAFs was classified as negative/focal at ≤30 % and a diffuse at >30 %. Results: Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated diffuse CAF nectin-1 expression in 64 cases (24.8 %). Diffuse nectin-1 expression in CAFs is associated with lymph node metastasis (p = 0.016), advanced UICC stage (p = 0.016), perineural invasion (p = 0.042), and tumour in the pancreas head (p = 0.023). Patients exhibiting diffuse nectin-1 expression in CAFs had signi_cantly shorter overall survival times than those with focal/negative expression of nectin-1 in CAFs (p = 0.003). Multivariate analysis also demonstrated diffuse nectin-1 expression in CAFs to be an independent prognostic factor. Conclusion: These findings indicate that diffuse nectin-1 expression in CAFs of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is associated with metastasis and patient survival. Not only neuroendocrine tumours but also other pancreatic tumours can be accompanied with serous cystic neoplasms even in patients without von Hippel-Lindau syndrome Objective: The abundant desmoplastic stroma reaction in pancreatic cancer, is considered to be an important reason for its aggressive tumour biology and resistance to chemotherapy. Method: FFPE -tissue from the pancreatectomy of 100 patients was IHC stained with αSMA, MMP 2 and 9 and TIMP 1,2 and expression for haematoxylin-eosin and Masson's trichrome to assess stroma density. Results: Tumour stroma in PDA was grading from "loose" in myxomatosis area, "moderate" to "dense" with collagen core. In "loose"-αSMA 1+; in "moderate"-2+ and "dense"-2-3+, but without express in collagen area. Masson's trichrome was positive in all area, but severity expression was different. In "loose" stroma we found some thin blue collagen fibers, separated myxomatosis; in "moderate" and "dense"-the fibers collagen was detected back to back, but in severity areas of collagen expression was strongly positive glaring blue colors. The expression level in carcinoma cells varied from negative to strong positivity and had a tendency to be associated with a low degree of differentiation. There is a direct correlation between the expression of MMP-2 (r = 0,34) and 9 (r = 0,67), and the presence of perineural invasion, tumour invasion to the duodenum, perineural invasion and peripancreatic tissue. In AC tumour cells strongly express MMP-2, MMP-9. Conclusion: During invasive tumour growth plays a direct role not only the fact of increasing the production of MMP, create a favorable environment for tumour growth, but also a marked decrease in expression of their inhibitors, which in turn favors more invasive growth. Objective: KRAS codon 12/13 mutations have been identified in over 95 % of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs). The i-densy analyzer can perform rapid gene analyses, including pretreatment, amplification, and detection, automatically on a single platform. We aimed to evaluate the usefulness of KRAS mutation analysis by i-densy using cytological material for PDAC diagnosis. Method: Seventeen patients were enrolled in this study. Fourteen were patients with clinically suspected PDAC, while the rest of them were chronic pancreatitis patients. KRAS codon 12/13 mutations in pancreatic brush and/or pancreatic juice samples were analyzed using i-densy and conventional cytological diagnostic method, and the results were compared. Results: KRAS mutations were detected in 11 and wild-type KRAS in five patients, using i-densy. The quantity of sample obtained from one patient was insufficient. Conventional analysis results were positive for nine, negative for seven, and equivocal in one patient. An almost perfect agreement between i-densy results and the final diagnosis was observed, while the agreement between conventional cytology results and final diagnosis was lower. The diagnostic accuracy of i-densy KRAS mutation analysis was shown to be higher than that of conventional cytology, indicating the potential for its use in clinical applications. Objective: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) develops most often in association with chronic liver disease like viral hepatitis or alcohol toxic cirrhosis. But also in inflammation-free, non-cirrhotic liver HCC can occur. Here, the underlying pathomechanism is largely unclear. Method: We used histochemical activity staining of cytochrome c oxidase (CCO), a component of the respiratory chain and partially encoded by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), to screen for mtDNA damage and to identify clonal liver cell patches. Mutations of the CCO genes in liver cell patches were analyzed by sequencing. Results: These patches represent presumably lineages of regeneratively active liver cells-potentially stem or progenitor cells. Significantly larger and more numerous patches in HCC-bearing compared to healthy liver suggest a reduced pool of active regenerating liver cells. MtDNA sequencing of the patches demonstrated besides a higher mutational burden also an homoplasmic state of the mutations. Adjacent patches failed to show common trunc mutations, indicating probably independent ancestors. Conclusion: In conclusion these data suggest a depletion of regeneratively active liver cells as an possible early stage in the development of HCC in non-cirrhotic livers. We present a 3Dreconstruction of liver patches and a model for mtDNA deprivation in liver progenitor cells. Combination immunohistochemistry for SMAD4 and Runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) may identify a favourable prognostic subgroup of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas Objective: SMAD4/DPC4 mutations have been associated with aggressive behavior in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC), and recently, it has been suggested using in vitro studies and animal models that RUNX3 expression combined with SMAD4 status may predict the metastatic potential of PDACs. In this study, we evaluated the prognostic utility of SMAD4/ RUNX3 status in human PDACs by immunohistochemistry. Method: Immunohistochemical stains were performed for SMAD4 and RUNX3 on 183 surgically resected PDACs, and the results were correlated with the clinicopathological features. Objective: Exosomes are important mediators in intercellular communications that play a role in cancer progression and metastasis. Exosomal membranes are enriched in endosome-specific tetraspanins (CD9 and CD63). We explored the expression of CD63 and CD9 utilizing IHC in PS. Method: Twenty-nine PS were identified. The pathologic tissue (PT) and adjacent normal tissue (ANT) in each PS was stained for CD63 and CD9 using IHC. Two pathologists independently scored the expression of CD63 and CD9. The intensity of staining was graded from 1 to 3. The percentage of stained cells was estimated in 10 % increments. An average Q score (Intensity X Percentage of staining) was calculated. Unpaired t test was used for statistical analysis. Results: The mean Q score for CD63 and CD9 expression is higher in PT (209 and 72, respectively) compared to ANT (154 and 24, respectively) (p = 0.0044; p = 0.0017). The Mean Q score for CD63 and CD9 expression is higher in the malignant PT (231 and 85 respectively, n = 17) compared to ANT (129 and 25, respectively) (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.0132). Conclusion: Exosomal markers (CD63 and CD9) expression assessment using IHC is feasible in PS. The expression of CD63 and CD9 is higher in PT and malignant PT compared to their ANT. Comparison between rejection activity index and national institutes of health grading system in liver biopsies for the diagnosis of graft versus host B. Ödüt * , S. Z. Aki, A. Armutlu, G. Sucak, Ü. Koçak, G. Esendagli, Z. Kaya, G. Akyol * Gazi University, Dept. of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey Objective: The aim of our study is comparison between rejection activity index (RAI) and national institutes of health (NIH) scoring system in bone marrow transplanted patients' liver biopsies. Method: 20 liver biopsies of 19 bone marrow transplanted patients were reviewed retrospectively and graded using the rejection activity index(RAI) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Development Project on Criteria for Clinical Trials in Chronic GVHD. Results: There were 14 men and 5 women with ages ranging from 4 to 66 years (mean: 26,2 years). The primary diseases were acute myeloid leukemia,acute lymphoblastic leukemia, nonHodgkin's lymphoma, Hodgkin's lymphoma, thalassemia and multiple myeloma. GVHD affected multiple organs in 7 patients. Overall survival is ranging from 3 to 112 months after transplantation (mean: 31,3 months Objective: Liver metastases are the most common form of spread of neuroendocrine tumours (NET), often being identified before the primary tumour. This study describes and compares the neuroendocrine immunohistochemical markers of liver metastases from NET. Method: Immunohistochemical stainings for chromogranin A (CgA), synaptophysin, CD56 e CD57 were performed in 18 liver metastases from NET (small bowel = 5; stomach/duodenum = 5; undetermined = 4; pancreas = 2 and lung = 2). Intensity of marker expression and percentage of positive staining areas were evaluated and compared. Results: The CD57 was expressed in highest number of cases (94.4 %), followed by CgA (83.3 %), CD56 (52.9 %) and synaptophysin (50 %). As while CgA showed the highest number of cases with more than 80 % of positive staining areas (80 %), followed by CD57 (64.7 %), synaptophysin (55.5 %) and CD56 (33.3 %). CD57 showed moderate/ strong intensity of expression in 100 %, CgA-86.6 %, synaptophysin-77.7 % and CD56-44.4 % of the cases. The concordance rate between CgA and CD57 was significant for positive immunostaining (p = 0.021) and for intensity of expression/percentage of positive staining areas (p = 0.014). CgA showed higher expression in small bowel, pancreas and undetermined; CD56 in pancreas and CD57 in all sites. Conclusion: CD57 showed results similar to CgA and higher than synaptophysin and CD56 in the characterization of liver metastases from NET. Objective: Our study focuses on the investigation of angiogenic process in liver primary and recurrent metastases secondary to colorectal cancer. Method: 24 cases including eight with recurrent metastases occurred after a previous treatment by thermonecrosis (group 1) and 16 with primary metastases treated exclusively by surgery (group 2) were immunohistochemically investigated using anti-CD31 antibody. Microvessels density (MVD) was quantified in 5 hot-spots, separately in intratumoural and peritumoural areas; a mean value was calculated for each case and group. Student's t-test was used for all statistical comparisons. Results: In group 1, intratumoural MVD was 30.58 ± 13.16, and peritumoural 58.33 ± 23.41, whereas in group 2 intratumoural MVD was 22.26 ± 9.12, and peritumoural 85.03 ± 34.68, with statistically significant differences intratumoural versus peritumoural for both groups (p = 0.01, and p < 0.0001, respectively). In addition, the comparison between group 1 and group 2 revealed significant differences in MVD only for peritumoural areas (p = 0.03). Conclusion: Our data points out the differences in angiogenic profile between recurrent and primary metastases. Peritumoural MVD mean values, lower in group 1, could be interpreted as a failure of angiogenic potential in metastatic recurrent disease, subsequently to the biological changes induced in tumour liver environment by thermonecrosis. Objective: Introduction: Fibronectin glomerulopathy is a rare genetic disease which can lead to renal failure and is characterized by proteinuria, hematuria and hypertension. Inheritance is autosomal dominant and the occurrence is more frequent in the third or fourth decade of life, but can affect any age group and both gender. The demonstration of fibronectin glomerular deposits in kidney biopsy is essential for diagnosis. In this article, we add to the literature two cases of fibronectin glomerulopathy that occurred in father and son, both with nephrotic syndrome, hypertension and hematuria. Method: CASE REPORT: A 14-year-old male, with nephrotic syndrome during 8 months associated with hematuria (1 + / 4 +), normal serum creatinine (0.73 mg / dl) and blood pressure of 165 × 100 mmHg. Renal biopsy showed all glomeruli with endocapillary hypercellularity, especially at the expense of mesangial cells, associated with large amount of eosinophilic/fuccinophilic deposits, negative to silver and Sirius-Red stains, in the mesangium and subendothelial in capillary loops, with some foci of basal membrane duplication. Congo Red staining for β-amyloid was negative. Immune research by immunofluorescence was negative. Electron microscopy showed large amount of eletrondense deposits, which in high power field, had fine granular appearance, located especially in mesangial and subendothelial in capillary loops, with rare subepithelial deposits. It was suspected of fibronectin glomerulopathy due to the characteristics and location of deposits. The immunohistochemistry for fibronectin was marked positive and immunostaining coincided with mesangial and capillary loops deposits. Thus, the case was diagnosed as fibronectin glomerulopathy. The patient was treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. Three years later, his renal function remained stable and 24 h proteinuria was varying between 3.0 and 5.0 g. Two years after the diagnosis of his son, the 24-h proteinuria research in the parent was 5.0 g and serum creatinine was 1.2 mg / dl. Scrutiny of 4 years ago already showed 24 h proteinuria of 4.98 g, but he had not a nephrology follow up. Also, there was hematuria and hypertension treated with angiotensin receptor blocker. Renal biopsy showed the same morphological findings of his son. Treatment was instituted with Losartan 100 mg; however proteinuria levels was the same up to date, 3 months after the biopsy. Results: DISCUSSION: These cases document the familial occurrence of fibronectin glomerulopathy. This entity was first described in 1980, with the name "familial glomerulopathy with giant fibrillary deposits" due to diffuse deposits, subendothelial, but often transmembranous and mesangial. In 1995, it was demonstrated deposits immunoreactivity to fibronectin and the disease was called "familiar glomerulonephritis with fibronectin deposits". In 2008, it was associated with mutations in the gene encoding fibronectin (FN1), located in 2q34, which occurs in 40 % of cases of disease. Objective: Single kidney is one of the relative contraindication to renal biopsy. Therefore, we evaluated the incidence of glomerular lesion from non-neoplastic portion of the nephrectomy specimen. Method: We examined a total of 97 patients with nephrectomy from urologic neoplasm for 6 years. Twenty-one cases were excluded because of end stage renal disease. The light microscopic findings of 76 cases of non-neoplastic kidney were evaluated, with immunofluorescence microscopy and electron microscopic examination. The mean age of patients was 62.1 years and the male to female ratio was 54:22. The diagnoses of neoplasm included 65 cases of renal cell carcinoma, 9 cases of urothelial cell carcinoma, one case of angiomyolipoma, and one case of hemangioma. Results: The diabetic nephropathy was the most common glomerular lesion in 19 (25 %), followed by 11 cases of IgA nephropathy (14.4 %), 6 C1q nephropathy (7.9 %), 2 membranous nephropathy, 1 C3 nephropathy, 1 IgM nephropathy, 3 diffuse glomerulomegaly, and 3 hypertensive nephrosclerosis. Normal appearing kidney was 32 cases (42.1 %). The glomerular lesion is not infrequent in non-neoplastic kidney, though most glomerular lesion is early in stage. So, the examination of non-neoplastic kidney in the nephrectomy specimen is needed. Keratin 17 marks a specific subset of tubular cells arising during renal injury R. D. Bülow * , S. Djudjaj, T. Braunschweig, P. Strnad, J. Floege, P. Boor * RWTH Universitätsklinik Aachen, Institut für Pathologie, Germany Objective: To comprehensively analyse Keratin 17 (K17) expression in healthy and diseased murine and human kidneys. Method: Five murine models of renal injury were analysed for K17expression using immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence, qRT-PCR and Western blotting. Human non-fibrotic and fibrotic kidney were investigated using immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. Results: In healthy murine kidneys showed no K17 expression. In response to injury K17 was expressed de novo in tubular cells, first in single cells which expanded and later on marked whole tubular cross-sections of collecting duct and distal tubules. Parietal epithelial cells (PECs) also showed de novo expression in a glomerular injury model. K17 did not co-localize with markers of tubular injury or proliferation. In healthy human kidneys, K17 was expressed at the basolateral side of distal tubular cells. This changed to a circumferential type of expression in response to renal injury. PECs, which were negative in healthy kidneys, showed strong K17 positivity in cases with periglomerular fibrosis. In fetal human kidney K17 was expressed in ureteric bud segments in a circumferential manner similar to disease state. Conclusion: We show that K17 is expressed de novo in response to renal injury in mice and in human glomeruli and marks a specific subpopulation of tubular cells. Objective: Importance of TGF-β signaling pathway has been already recognized in cell culture experiments and in animal models of kidney fibrosis. However, there is lack of evidence with regard to significance of TGF-β effectors (SMAD2, SMAD3, SNAIL) in nephrotic syndrome of humans and their relations to clinico-pathological parameters. Method: Clinical and histopathological characteristics of 50 kidney biopsies were analyzed with respect to expression and distribution of SMAD2, SMAD3 and SNAIL molecules, detected by immunohistochemistry, in order to investigate the relevance of TGF-β effectors detection in kidney biopsies of patients with nephrotic syndrome and isolated proteinuria. Results: SMAD2 and SNAIL nuclear expression in proximal tubule cells correlated with interstitial fibrosis (p < 0.001) and tubular atrophy (p < 0.001). Significantly higher urea (p = 0.026) and creatinine (p = 0.006) levels were found in patients with tubular nuclear expression of SMAD2 and SNAIL. These patients had also significantly reduced eGFR (p = 0.007) and higher CKD stages (p = 0.001) at the time of biopsy. Proteinuria was significantly higher in patients with SNAIL expression in podocytes (p < 0.001). Correlation between SMAD3 expression and clinico-pathological parameters was not detected. Conclusion: Expression of TGF-β downstream effectors SMAD2 and SNAIL in kidney biopsies represent immunomorphological substrate of chronic kidney parenchymal damage, correlating with higher proteinuria levels and decreased excretory kidney function. Objective: The Royal College of Pathologists supports a competency based framework for independent reporting of histology and cytology specimens. This is achieved using graded responsibilities, roughly intended to correlate with each year of training. The aim of this project was to assess the awareness and attitudes of current histopathology trainees towards such independent reporting. Method: Prospectively administered structured questionnaire of histopathology trainees in the London training region. Results: 54 histopathology trainees responded to the questionnaire. Seventy-five percent were aware of the concept, but only 39 % were aware of the Royal College document. Awareness and use of the document increased with seniority but the majority were not yet reporting independently (78 %). Many trainees reported they would feel ready to start reporting independently following completion of Part 1 of the fellowship exam for the Royal College of Pathologists (48 %), but nearly a quarter would like to start earlier than this (24 %). Conclusion: Although most trainees are aware of the concept of graded responsibility for reporting independently, only 22 % are reporting independently. Uptake of independent reporting needs the backing of the consultant body within the department, but most trainees are keen to participate. Multiple organ involvement in IgG4-related disease, misidentified as medical insurance case of asbestosis, leads to sudden death by endocarditis L. Ozretic * , T. Blau, A. Brunn, R. Buettner, J. Fries * Universitätsklinik Köln, Inst. für Pathologie, Germany Method: A 73-year-old Caucasian male was autopsied, suffering from diabetes type 2, hypertension, cerebral infarction, colon cancer, unclear pancreatic tail lesion, and chronic lung disease. Clinical and radiologic findings were diagnosed as pulmonary asbestosis starting 12 years ago and being accepted as professionally acquired disease by medical insurance. The patient died unexpectedly in cardiorespiratory failure. Results: At autopsy, the classic triad of lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, storiform fibrosis, and obliterative phlebitis was detected. IgG4: IgG ratio was high ( 40 %; 50 plasma cells/HPF). Organ involvement included: pancreas, kidneys, spleen, lungs, heart valves, meninges. Diabetes was caused through fibrotic islet destruction. No signs of pulmonary asbestosis were found. Pleural plaque-like fibrotic areas were present. A thrombulcerative endocarditis of the mitral valve enhanced the preexisting hypertensive cardiac failure. Conclusion: In patients with unusual clinical manifestations and seemingly unrelated organ damage a high suspicion for IgG4-related disease as linking disorder is warranted. This case is notable as the first report of IgG4-related endocarditis with meningeal involvement and death in septic shock caused by multi-organ targeting of IgG4-related disease mistaken as an insurance case of asbestosis related disease, demonstrating the value of a postmortem analysis. Objective: Modulated electro-hyperthermia (mEHT, oncothermia) generates electric field which can interfere with malignant tumours at 42°C resulting in low energy density destruction of neoplastic cells. The tumour selectivity of mEHT is due to increased metabolite content and permittivity of tumours compared to normal tissues. In vitro 3D tumour cell cultures mimicking tissue complexity better than cell monolayers were used to test mEHT induced tumour cell death and stress responses. Method: C26 mouse colorectal carcinoma cells were grown in Matrigel scaffolding (Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm tumour matrix) in LabTek and treated in four groups using: 1) conventional hyperthermia at 42°C (HT); 2) mEHT with non-contact electrodes, 3) mEHT with contact electrodes and 4) no treatment (control) at 37°C. Results: Both mEHT and HT treatments induced chromatin condensation and apoptotic bodies seen in H&E-stained formalinfixed, paraffin-embedded culture sections. TUNEL assay confirmed apoptosis related DNA fragmentation. The expression of heat stress induced Hsp60 and Hsp70 proteins showed a decreasing gradient in mEHT>HT>control direction. Also, both mEHT and HT treatments resulted in elevated Bax and cleaved caspase-3 protein levels. Conclusion: In conclusion, our results showed that Matrigel embedded 3D cultures can be useful to test mEHT induced cell death and stress responses and correlate with traditional hyperthermia (HT) effects. A comparative morphology of anterior abdominal wall tissues after using bovine-derived peritoneum implant and acellular dermal matrix in the experiment R. Badyrov * , N. Abatov, M. Tussupbekova, J. Alberton, K. Abugaliev * State Medical University, Dept. of Surgical Diseases, Karaganda, Kazakhstan Objective: To assess the structural changes of the abdominal wall upon contact with acellular dermal matrix ("Permacol") and a new biological implant-bovine-derived peritoneum in the early stages after implantation. Method: Open abdominal wall defect was repaired by bovine-derived peritoneum (group I) and "Permacol" (group II) implants in 48 rats. Observation periods: 7,21,30 days. Macroscopical criteria were an infection existence, adhesion and seroma formation. Microscopical criteria were an inflammatory response, neovascularization, connective tissue maturation. A technique of staining with H&E. Results: Macroscopically, in group I in all cases no seroma or infection was observed, in group II in 13 % cases wounds were infected. In group I in 9 % cases adhesions at the margins of implants and suture sites was registered, in group II adhesions in almost half cases were observed. Microscopically, in both groups, on the 7 day there were the granulation tissue and thinwalled blood vessels formation, the suture-line reactive inflammation. By the 21 day granulation tissue maturation, moderate lymphocytes infiltration were fixed. At the 30 day connective tissue maturation was registered, inflammatory response was absent. Conclusion: Bovine-derived peritoneum has been showed adequate biocompatibility with the recipient body, without causing severe postimplantation inflammation. These data is allowed to use it for abdominal wall reconstruction perspectively. Method: A Pathology based cancer registry was established at DUHS and data were extracted, indexed and analyzed to calculate frequency, percentages, crude and age standardized incidence rates for various malignancies. Results: During 2010-2015, a total of 13,508 cancers were diagnosed. Of these, 5665 (41.9 %) were in males while 7843 (58.1 %) were in females. Incidence rates for all cancers were 72.2 per 1,00,000 (crude) and 152.8 per 1,00,000 (ASR) for males and 116.2 per 1,00,000 (crude) and 235.0 per 1,00,000 (ASR) for females. In males, cancer of lip and oral cavity was the most frequently diagnosed cancer (30.8 %, ASR 42.0), followed by cancers of skin (8.1 %, ASR 14.0) and colorectum (7 %, ASR 9.8). In females, breast cancer was the most frequently recorded malignancy (49.5 %, ASR 112.5), followed by lip and oral cavity (11.2 %, ASR 30.7) and oesophagus (5.6 %, ASR 14.4). Conclusion: We report that Karachi has the highest incidence of cancers of breast, lip and oral cavity, oesophagus and larynx in females and cancer of lip and oral cavity and larynx in males compared to any of the Asian populations. Analysis of histopathology fees in East Africa with comparison to developed countries: Disparities in relation to sustainability and quality of service delivery A. Kalebi * * Pathologists Lancet Kenya, Dept. of Pathology, Nairobi, Kenya Objective: Little has been published on histopathology test fees in East Africa. This analysis seeks to compare the fees charged in a bid to unravel relevant discrepancies and disparities. Method: Charges for histopathology services were sought through personal contacts and internet searches of fee schedules from key representative facilities in 5 East African countries, USA, UK, South Africa and Australia. Results: We present a detailed tabulation comparing the range of fees charged for routine H&E, special stains and immunohistochemistry. Overall we observe that there is a huge disparity in the charges within and between the countries in East Africa, and also with the other countries. The charges for a small routine biopsy in East Africa generally ranged from $5USD to $50USD. Many instances were noted where the fees charged are lower than the cost of rendering the services. Also there is no standardised procedure coding system, which pose challenges for appropriate billing. Conclusion: The charges for histopathology services in East Africa are substantially lower than developed countries, while the cost of rendering these services are relatively higher. This may impact the sustainability & quality of service provision. Policy makers and stakeholders ought to consider price rationalization for pathology services. PS-07-012 Documentation and appropriate completion of medical certification of cause-of-death forms by physicians at a first tier tertiary teaching hospital in a sub-Saharan African country C. Ukah * , A. Nwofor * Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Dept. of Histopathology, Nnewi, Nigeria Objective: This retrospective study was undertaken to answer the following questions: how frequent are death certificates issued for deaths occurring at a tertiary hospital in Nigeria, and whether death certificates are being completed correctly by physicians. Method: All deaths occurring at the hospital over a 5-year-period were stratified by ward and sex. Also, death certificates issued by physicians at the hospital were retrieved, and the wording and statements on the death certificate examined to determine whether the underlying cause-of-death in each case was listed in an acceptable manner or not. Errors in death certificate's completion were categorized into 4 categories according to the classification system adopted by We examined cytoplasmic features of SRC, such as containment of pink, yellow, or orange mucins, green, vacuolar, or vesicular cytoplasm, and globular green cytoplasmic inclusion, and appearing patterns of SRC, such as single cell pattern or cluster-formation. The formation of mucinous cribriform structure was also studied. The univariate analysis showed that significantly frequent findings included pink mucin, green, vacuolar, or vesicular cytoplasm, globular green cytoplasmic inclusions, single cell pattern, cluster formation, and mucinous cribriform structure. The stepwise multivariate analysis identified three significant contributing features including pink mucin (p = 0.03), vesicular cytoplasm (p = 0.06), and single cell pattern (p = 0.01). If the cytological specimens showed two or three of these features, the sensitivity and specificity were 88 % in both for the prediction of ALK gene rearrangement. Virchows Arch (2016) 469 (Suppl 1):S1-S346 S93 chronic pancreatitis remains a very difficult task in the scarce material obtained. Method: A total of 26 EUS-FNAC procedures have been performed in pancreatic masses during the last 2 years in our Institution. The specimens included conventional cytological slides a n d f o r m a l i n -f i x e d p a r a f f i n -e m b e d d e d c e l l b l o c k s . Immunohistochemistry was performed with Maspin, p53 and CA19.9. Results: Seventeen DAP (65.3 %), 4 suspicious cases (15.3 %) and 5 negative cases (19.2 %) were diagnosed using only classic cytological criteria. All DAP and negative cases were confirmed by biopsy or radiologic follow-up. Subsequent biopsies also revealed that 3 of the suspicious cases were actually DAP and one was a neuroendocrine tumour. Immunohistochemistry performed in cell blocks revealed that Maspin, CA 19.9, and p53 were positive in 19/20 (95 %), 12/20 (60 %) and 4/20 (20 %) DAP, respectively. Conclusion: EUS-FNAC is a safe and quick method in the diagnosis of DAP. Cytological smears and cell blocks are recommended for a more reliable analysis. The accuracy of EUS-FNAC in pancreatic masses can be improved combining classic cytological criteria and immunohistochemistry performed in the cell blocks. Rosai-Dorfman Disease diagnosed on fine needle aspiration biopsy in a child: A case report and review of the literature A. Mutuiri * * Aga Khan University Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Nairobi, Kenya Objective: To describe the diagnosis of Rosai-Dorfman disease (Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy) by fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNA) of a lymph node in a young child, and briefly review the literature. Method: A 3-year-old male child was referred to our regular FNA clinic with a one week history of progressive left neck swellings. On examination he had left cervical firm mobile non-tender lymph nodes measuring 5 cm by 4 cm, 4 cm by 3 cm and 2 cm by 2 cm. FNAwas performed under general anaesthesia due to the child's age. Results: Diagnostic material was obtained. Cytology smears showed a cellular smear of polymorphous lymphoid population with small mature lymphocytes and numerous multinucleated histiocytes in a haemorrhagic background. The histiocytes showed marked lymphocyte emperipolesis. The adenopathy subsequently resolved and the child, now 6 years old, has not had a recurrence. Conclusion: Rosai-Dorfman disease was successfully diagnosed on FNA of cervical lymph nodes. FNA is a valuable low cost tool in screening patients to determine whether a biopsy is necessary in the management of lymphadenopathy. Objective: The squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a very rare subtype of the breast. The cytological diagnosis of non-keratinizing, poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma is sometimes difficult with the discrimination from invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) or apocrine carcinoma (AC) being especially challenging. We aimed to clarify diagnostic cytological features of mammary poorly differentiated SCC. We investigated cytological findings of poorly differentiated SCC (n = 10), and compared them with those of IDC (n = 15) and AC (n = 14). The following cytological parameters were evaluated: streaming arrangement, nucleolar enlargement, dense nuclei, cannibalism, and necrotic background. Results: Cytological specimens of SCC cases showed significantly higher incidence of streaming arrangement (p = 0.002), nucleolar enlargement (p = 0.02) and necrotic background (p = 0.002) than those of IDC. Streaming arrangement (p < 0.001), cannibalism (p = 0.002) and necrotic background (p = 0.047) in SCC were more frequent than in those of AC. Detection of two or more parameters described above in SCC showed higher sensitivity (80 %) and specificity (93 %) for correct diagnosis, in comparison with IDC. When differentiating from AC, the presence of parameters in SCC improved sensitivity (80 %) and specificity (100 % Objective: The Royal College of Pathologists introduced category Thy3a (atypical features) in 2011. Our aim was to assess the use of Thy3a at our institution since its introduction in Jan 2012. Method: All thyroid FNAs reported between Jan 2011 and Dec 2015 were identified. Frequency and patient outcomes including repeated FNA and surgical resections were analysed, with an emphasis on Thy3a. Results: The sensitivity (92.31 %) and specificity (99.90 %) of our thyroid FNA diagnoses over 5 years were consistent and within published guidelines. Over the 4 years period, our diagnostic frequency of Thy3a was 1.2 % (16 of 1261 cases). 7 of these 16 cases had repeat FNAs, ultimately reported as Thy1 (n = 1), Thy 1c (n = 1), Thy 2 (n = 3), Thy 3f (n = 1) and Thy 5 (n = 1). 4 cases were follicular adenomas on resection. 1 case was an occult micropapillary carcinoma and 4 cases had no further specimens sent to histopathology. Conclusion: In our practice, we have a very low rate of Thy3a category use. This has not impacted negatively on our sensitivity or specificity. We suggest that the Thy3a category be critically analysed to establish the appropriate frequency and real benefit of this diagnostic category. Cell agglutination is a cheap and accurate complement for fine needle aspiration in order to obtain cell-block material R. Caetano Oliveira * , P. Rodrigues, P. Serra, J. Objective: Fine needle aspiration (FNA) is a widely used technique that besides providing diagnosis also attains to get biologic material for cellblock to perform immunocytochemistry and molecular biology techniques. Guidelines for FNA promptly affirm to stop aspirating as soon as material enters the hub/barrel of the syringe and use the material on the needle. We present an alternative and cheaper method for collecting biologic material on FNA. Method: In an 8 years period, FNA was performed according to international guidelines, but when material entered the barrel of the syringe, aspiration was not stopped in order to get sample in the barrel. Needle material was placed in glass slides for ordinary staining and barrel content was placed directly in to a vial with formaldehyde, where it agglutinates and posteriorly was embed in paraffin. Stained slides were compared using this technique and liquid based cytology. Results: We obtained cell-block material from different organs such as soft tissue, salivary glands, pancreas, breast and lymph node, with excellent morphologic and immunocytochemistry results. In out method there was better cellular and architecture preservation. Conclusion: Cell agglutination of biologic material in formaldehyde is a cheap, quicker and accurate way to obtain cell-block, allowing ancillary studies and improving diagnosis capacity. Results: Our findings show a significant degree of morphologic overlap between reactive and malignant cells. 'Exploding' mitotic figures, nuclear membrane irregularities, multi-nucleation and cytoplasmic vacuolation were reactive features commonly present in negative fluid specimens, presenting potential pitfalls to accurate diagnosis. The most discriminating feature that favored malignant cells was increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. In addition, the presence of increased eosinophils and 'pseudoparakeratotic cells' were helpful clues indicating prior IPChT. Conclusion: Post-IPChT peritoneal fluid specimens pose unique diagnostic challenges. Awareness of the extent and spectrum of atypical features exhibited by benign constituents, coupled with the judicious use of immunocytochemistry are key to accurate cytologic interpretation. Objective: Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) is the recommended sampling procedure for solid pancreatic cancer. There are no guidelines about the sampling and processing techniques, therefore, they vary substantially across medical centers. Method: We aimed to compare the diagnostic yield of samples obtained with stylet or suction in 75 prospectively enrolled patients with pancreatic masses. The number of smears, cellularity and bloodiness were assessed, and considering our results, we established a recommendation for sampling. Objective: Despite the cell block be considered a diagnostic method of wide applicability in routine practice, the indication of each method according to the different types and aspects of cytological samples is not well established. Thus, the aim of this study was to evaluate the applicability of the plasma-thromboplastin (PT) method in pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, cerebrospinal fluids, peritoneal and bronchoalveolar lavage, urine and aspirated cystic lesions. Method: Conventional smear, cell block and immunocytochemistry were prepared for each cytological sample (n = 299). Results: The PT method was applicable in samples without sediment or small amount of sediment and with sediment of blood, 88.3 % of the samples. Samples with large amount of sediment and anticoagulant (11.7 %) were prepared by agar method. Adequate cellularity and cellular distribution with preservation of the morphology of groups and cells were observed in both methods. The immunocytochemical staining pattern was similar to that usually observed in conventional smears. Agreement was observed in 96.9 %, between the diagnoses of cell block and conventional smears. In some samples, cancer was detected only by cell block. Conclusion: The plasma-thromboplastin method is applicable in most samples, has high diagnostic agreement with conventional smears and may decrease the false-negatives of cytological analyses. The Method: A 59-year-old woman with invasive ductal breast carcinoma is presented. A staging CT scan showed a 9 mm round mass in the tail of the pancreas. In order to stablish a correct staging (metastatic vs synchronous disease), an endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration cytology (EUS-FNAC) was requested. Results: Cytologic study showed discohesive cellularity with minimal atipia, and rounded nuclei with finely stippled ("salt-andpepper") chromatin. No mitotic figures were detected. Immunohistochemical staining using cytological slides demonstrated reactivity for chromogranin, synaptophisin and progesterone receptors, with a low proliferation index (3-5 %) measured with Ki67, leading the diagnosis of pNET, suggesting low/intermediate grade and starting with the oncologic and surgical management of the breast cancer (T2cN2M0). Conclusion: EUS-FNAC is considered the technique of choice for the diagnosis of pNETs, being a non-invasive, highly sensitive (80-90 %) and specific (100 %) procedure with minimal complications. Factors, such as experienced endoscopists and cytopathologists, together with immunohistochemical markers, including PR (correlated with low aggressiveness) and Ki67 (necessary for grading the neoplasm), provide crucial information for the patient management. and rare mitotic figures, some with cytoplasmic melanin pigment granules, positive for HMB-45, S100 protein and vimentin-melanoma metastases. Ninety-one year-old woman showed neutrophils, cells with large cytoplasm and eccentric nucleus, positive for CD68-granulomatous inflammatory lesion. Sixty-three-yearold woman presented spindle cells with mild nuclear pleomorphism and round cells arranged in monotone fibrillar matrixsuggestive of fusocellular tumour of uncertain malignant potential (UMP). Fifty-nine-year-old woman presented large and clarified cytoplasm cells, arranged around fibrous structures, positive for CK7, P63 and calponin and negative for desmin and alpha-1antitrypsin-UMP myoepithelial tumour. Conclusion: Cytology of spindle cells lesions encompasses a wide variety of lesions, with potential pitfalls. The conjugation of morphology, immunocytochemical and clinical aspects is fundamental for accurate diagnosis. Objective: Metastatic cancers to thyroid might be presented with thyroid lumps and subsequently, be subjected to fine needle aspiration (FNA). Diagnostic dilemma to differentiate secondary from primary thyroid mimickers occurred when clinical information was unavailable. This study is to explore cytomorphology of these cases. Method: Thyroid FNAs, performed during January 2007 and March 2016 at Chiang Mai University Hospital, Thailand, were retrieved under diagnoses of "metastatic cancer", "metastatic cancer cannot be excluded" or "primary versus metastasis". Cytological slides were reviewed along with their histologic correlates and clinical data. Results: Out of 2444 thyroid FNAs, 20 with definite or equivocal diagnoses of metastatic tumours were encountered. Eight of which were confirmed to have metastatic nature. These include 1 squamous cell carcinoma from tonsil, 1 osteosarcoma, 3 pulmonary adenocarcinoma, 1 hepatocellular carcinoma, 1 endocervical adenocarcinoma and 1 unknown primary. Two metastatic cases were presented without prior clinical cancer history. Primary thyroid mimickers include anaplastic, medullary and papillary carcinomas. Certain cytological patterns could be readily diagnosed. Conclusion: Although certain distinct cytological patterns may be of diagnostic, those with pleomorphic and papillary cellular patterns may be problematic. Presence of normal thyroid counterparts, clinical data and ancillary studies are helpful with these diagnostic challenges. Conclusion: Women with cervix pathology have the same changes as the classical groups of oropharyngeal cancer. Despite the same data of atypical cytology in cigarette smoking and alcohol abuse groups high risk HPV was revealed 2 times less than in multipartners and women with cervix pathology. This may indicate to oropharingeal carcinogenesis independence from HPV. Because of detecting atypical changes and high risk HPV in control group, it is recommended to carry out oral cancer screening program in the whole population and not only in risk-groups. Telomere length of mesothelial cells in pleural effusion measured using quantitative fluorescence in situ hybridization (Q-FISH) method S. Aida * , J. Aida, Y. Tsuura, M. Naoi, K. Takubo * Int. Univ. Health and Welfare, Mita Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Tokyo, Japan Objective: Telomeres are repetitive DNA sequences at the ends of chromosomes, which generally shorten by 50 to 200 base pairs with each cell division and telomere shortening increases the risk of malignancy. In this study, we estimated telomere lengths of mesothelial cells in pleural effusion to examine the correlation between the telomere length and mesothelial carcinogenesis. Virchows Arch (2016) 469 (Suppl 1):S1-S346 S97 The NTCRs of LA and MM were significantly lower than NN. CD146, IMP3 and Glut-1, which are known as malignant markers of mesothelial cells, rarely express in NN and tend to be seen in the cases with lower NTCRs. The results indicate that telomere shortening of mesothelial cells might be associated with the development of malignant mesothelioma. Objective: One of the goal of urine cytology is to detect lesion, especially for recurrence lesion before they can be detect cystoscopically. Method: 40 patient with high grade urothelial carcinoma were examined during clinical follow-up within 3, 6 and 12 month after TUR with routine PAP test and p53 and HER2 to monitoring early recurrence. Results: Negative for HGUC was in 19 cases, only in one case from this group HER2 was expressed as strong membrane stain less than 10 % cells, in 4 cases was weak nuclear stain of p53. In 2 cases in AUC group was no reaction with HER2, and weak stain with p53 in one case. AUC-H (2 cases) both with strong reactivity with HER2. In urothelial carcinoma LG in 9 cases we had strong HER2 stain in 5 cases and p53 positive in 4 cases. Recurrence of urothelial carcinoma was diagnosed in 8 cases within 12 month of clinical follow-up and there was strong positive stain both with HER2 and p53. Conclusion: Urine cytology could be useful approach to detect early recurrence of HGUC and immunocytochemistry can help to discriminate them as recurrence or not. Could a sarcomatous component seem like an "atypical glandular cell"? G. Özgün * , E. Yilmaz Akçay, N. Haberal Reyhan * Baskent University, Pathology, Ankara, Turkey Objective: Malignant neoplasms, other than squamous and adenocarcinoma may be seen in Pap smears. They appear on Pap smears either as exfoliated cells or via direct sampling of tumours that involve cervix by direct extension. Method: A 71-year-old postmenopausal women with abnormal vaginal bleeding was referred to our hospital. On her gynecologic examination she had a protruding mass from her cervical os. She was evaluated by a Pap smear first. Her Pap smear revealed irregular and discohesive cell groups that had ill defined and transparent cytoplasm, peripherally located nuclei, vesicular chromatin and, conspicious nucleoli. There was no spindle cell component seen. The Pap smear was diagnosed as AGC, NOS. Results: On pathological examination of the endometrial curettage and following hysterectomy specimen, the tumour was diagnosed as mullerian adenosarcoma. Detailed examination of the sarcomatous component revealed the remarkable resemblance of the cells that was seen on Pap smear. Conclusion: Adenosarcoma is composed of a benign epithelial component admixed with a malignant mesenchymal component. Although it is well known histologically, its cytological features are rarely described. Adenosarcomas are rare lesions but should be considered in the differential diagnosis when the cell clusters unlike typical AGC are noted in a Pap smear. PS-08-030 Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma: A case report of a frequently unrecognized entity in fine needle aspiration cytology F. Santos * , R. Cabrera, F. Cunha * Instituto Portugues de Oncologia de Lisboa, Dept. de Anatomia Patológica, Portugal Objective: Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDCS) is a neoplastic proliferation of antigen-presenting accessory cells of the immune system. Despite having distinctive cytological features, it remains a commonly misdiagnosed entity. We report a case of FDCS unrecognized by fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) that was only diagnosed after excision. Method: We describe the clinicopathological features of a case of FDCS, with a review of the literature. Results: A 69-year-old woman presented with a left cervical mass. FNAC was performed and smears showed atypical spindle cells, isolated or in syncytia, admixed with small lymphocytes. No definite diagnosis was rendered and excision was recommended. Microscopically, it consisted of a whorled proliferation of spindle to ovoid cells with indistinct cytoplasm and bland vesicular nuclei, interspersed with small lymphocytes. Neoplastic cells were CD21+. A diagnosis of FDCS was made. Smears were reviewed and CD21 was performed on cytology specimens. The FNAC findings, in conjunction with the immunocytochemistry results, would have been diagnostic if the entity had been suspected. Conclusion: The main challenge in the diagnosis of FDCS results from failure to consider it in the differential diagnosis. Increased awareness of FDCS may improve the recognition of its distinctive cytological features, rendering a specific pre-operative diagnosis. Ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration on evaluation of axillary lymph nodes status on primary breast cancer P. Serra * , J. Fraga, R. Pina, G. Fernandes * Centro Hospitalar e Universitario de Coimbra, Dept. de Anatomia Patológica, Portugal Objective: The aim of this study is to determine the sensivity, specificity, positive (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) and general acuity of Ultrasound (US) guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) for pre-surgical evaluation of axillary lymph nodes status on primary breast cancer. Method: Retrospective study of 328 patients with a pathological diagnosis of primary breast cancer between 2010 and 2014, who had performed US guided FNA for axillary lymph node evaluation and posterior sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) or axillary dissection. The patients were selected consecutively from our department database and the cytological and histological diagnosis were compared. Results: We obtained 24,5 % false negative and 2,2 % false positive results, resulting on a sensivity of 80,55 %, 95,91 % specificity, PPV of 97,32 %, NPV of 72,27 % and general acuity of 84,89 %. Conclusion: US guided FNA at our institution showed good correlation with the histological results with a high specificity and PPV and good acuity and can be routinely used on axillary lymph nodes evaluation. The results were discrepant mainly when there was obtained scant material on FNA or when the cytology showed isolated atypical cells of unknown significance. This technique avoids SLNB and shortens the waiting time for axillary dissection and neoadjuvant chemotherapy start. Cytologic features of acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas: A report of four cases J. Jimenez Heffernan * , C. Gordillo, C. Barcena, A. Perez Campos, A. Urquia Renke * Objective: Pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma (ACC) is a rare neoplasm with few cytologic descriptions. Cytology may resemble that of islet cell tumours. The purpose of this study is to report our experience with four cases of ACC that were evaluated using FNA. Method: Four cases of ACC in which FNA was performed preoperatively were selected. Two corresponded to endoscopic US-guided-FNA and two to percutaneous FNA. All tumours had a complete histologic evaluation. Results: Smears were hypercellular and revealed numerous poorly cohesive clusters as well as single cells. Aggregates were irregular, with cellular crowding, occasional vessels and pseudopapillary structures. Acinar or rosette-like groups were present in three cases. Cytoplasmic fragility and naked nuclei were a frequent finding. When preserved, the cytoplasm was slightly granular. Although marginal nuclear location was seen, plasma cell morphology or binucleation were absent. All cases showed evident nucleoli. Relevant anisonucleosis was present in two cases. Two cases were diagnoses as neuroendocrine tumours, one as adenocarcinoma and in the remaining one the possibility of ACC was suggested. Conclusion: Cytology of pancreatic ACC shows peculiar morphologic features. Although it may resemble neuroendocrine tumours some findings such as prominent nucleoli, granular cytoplasm, acinar clusters and no evident plasma cell morphology should alert the pathologist. Electron microscopy (EM) is a useful method to discover Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) L. Jafari * , C. Ortiz-Villalón * Karolinska University Hospital, Dept. of Clinical Pathology, Stockholm, Sweden Objective: Kartagener syndrome is characterized by the combination of chronic sinusitis, bronchiectasis and situs inversus. It is related to the Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD). Electron microscopy is the gold standard method to determine PCD. The purpose of this study is to show a case report where EM was a useful diagnostic tool. Method: The current case is a 39-years old woman with known situs inversus and asthma. CT-Scan showed bilateral bronchiectasis and she was referred to the Department of Respiratory Diseases. Where bronchoscopy was made based on the suspicion of Kartagener syndrome. Bronchial brushes were sent to EM. After plastembedding, sectioning and staining, several pictures were taken for analysis. Results: 46 cilia were counted. The average of outer dynein arm was 1.2, inner dynein arm 0.9 and nexin link 3.9, and orientation was varying. Ultrastructural analysis showed PCD. Conclusion: The diagnosis of Kartagener syndrome is not difficult to suspect. The difficulty is to keep this diagnosis in mind since the symptoms are non-specific. However, the association with situs inversus should help to raise the diagnostic suspicion. The importance of early diagnostic and symptomatic treatment as well as prevention of infections is emphasized by the progressive degeneration in respiratory function in patients with PCD if untreated. Objective: MiR-9, miR-21, miR-155, and miR-944 are known to promote cell growth, migration and invasion in human cervical cancer cells. The aim of this study was to investigate expression levels of miRNAs (miR-9, miR-21, miR-155, and miR-944) in 53 formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) cervical cancer samples and 50 FFPE normal samples. The expression levels of miR-9, miR-21, miR-155, and miR-944 from FFPE samples were analyzed using quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-qPCR). RNU6B miR was used as an internal control. Results: MiR-9, miR-21, miR-155, and miR-944 were useful markers for discriminating cancer samples from normal samples with an area under the ROC curve (AUC) of 0.7565 [95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.6624 to 0.8507], 0.8325 (95 % CI 0.7530 to 0.9120), 0.8492 (95 % CI 0.7736 to 0.9249), and 0.8522 (95 % CI 0.7779 to 0.9265), respectively. Moreover, the expression levels of miR-9 (P = 0.0039), miR-155 (P = 0.0039), and miR-944 (P = 0.0154) were significantly higher in tissue samples which are positive to HPV E6/E7 expressions than those which are negative. Conclusion: In conclusion, miR-9, miR-21, miR-155, and miR-944 seem to be up-regulated in cervical cancer samples and the up-regulation seems to be related to HPV oncogene expression. Results: All tumours expressed PRL-R in their epithelial cells. Benign tumours showed significantly stronger expression than other categories (p < 0.001). PRL-R expression in malignant tumours was significantly higher with higher grade and stage (p = 0.013 and p = 0.037). PRL was expressed in tumour epithelial cells and/or stroma. Stromal expression was seen in 58 % of cases, which was significantly higher in borderline tumours as compared to other categories (p < 0.001). Expression in tumour epithelial cells was seen in 17 % of cases, 85 % of which were malignant. In these tumours there was a significant correlation with shorter patient survival (p = 0.033). Conclusion: The expression of PRL and PRL-R in ovarian epithelial tumours indicates the presence of an autocrine loop, which appears to influence clinical outcome. Our results show the potential of PRL and PRL-R as prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets in ovarian carcinoma. The usage of atomic power microscopy in nano-histological studies (at the example of preeclampsia) T. Pavlova * , A. Selivanova, V. Petrukhin * Belgorod State National University, Dept. of Pathology, Russia Objective: Recent years the method of atomic power microscopy(APM) has become the one of fundamental methods, which allows to make first steps in nano-pathology of the human Method: APM was conducted with help of microscope «Ntegra-Aura». The specimens of uterus (endometrium, myometrium), blood, placenta, umbilical cord of 30 women were researched. Results: The alteration of cytoarchitectonics of erythrocytes in women on background of preeclampsia was shown with help of APM. The sizes of cells did not differ authentically from control group (6,8 ± 0,4 μm and 7,0 ± 0,3 μm). The number of cells with degenerative changes and erythrocytes with hemolysis was increased. The depth of discocytes was 0,25 ± 0,04 μm (0,38 ± 0,05 μm). The anatomy of pores was violated. The alteration of microrelief of endothelium was in blood vessels of umbilical cord. The number of normocytes was decreased significantly up to 42,0 ± 2,0 % (85,0 ± 4,0 %). The microcytes with diameter 5,5 ± 0,5 and thickness 1,95 ± 0,4 μm prevailed among blood cells. At the pathological course of pregnancy the smoothing of relief in terminal villi due to narrowing or complete absence of the lumen of the blood vessels was revealed (1,5 ± 0,2 μm и 3,2 ± 0,5 μm). Conclusion: APM is reliable and effective method for research of biological objects in pathology. This method can be used as the method for express-diagnosis, particularly for research of system "mother-placenta" at complicated pregnancy. The usage of scanning microscopy for exploration of pathology of macro-and microelements in system "mother-placenta-fetus" at eclampsia T. Pavlova * , A. Selivanova * Belgorod State National University, Dept. of Pathology, Russia Objective: Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia, the most severe complications of pregnancy that can lead to maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Method: The materials of patients (biopsy specimens, umbilical cord, placenta), pregnancy of whom was complicated by preeclampsia(65) and eclampsia(10), were researched. The precise elemental analysis was conducted with usage of detector for registration of spectra of the characteristic X-ray radiation, which was integrated with raster electron microscope. Results: The content of oxygen in erythrocytes of vascular bed in endometrium was 35,22 ± 2,01 % at preeclampsia and 30,12 Tuesday, 27 September 2016, 09.30-10.30, Hall 11.3 PS-10 Gynaecological Pathology ± 2,31 % at eclampsia; 45,12 ± 2,35 % in control group. The same tendency for oxygen, magnesium, phosphorus was detected inside and outside of spiral arteries of myometrium. The quantity of oxygen in arteries of umbilical cord was 33,46 ± 1,45 % at preeclampsia, 29,81 ± 2,06 % at eclampsia and 43,91 ± 2,25 % at normal pregnancy; in veins-24,60 ± 2,30 %; 21,60 ± 2,06 %; 34,60 ± 2,32 % respectively. The decreasing of magnesium was revealed. At pathology of pregnancy the quantity of oxygen was rapidly decreased in vessels of chorion as well in intervillous space(23,85 ± 2,45 %; 21,96 ± 2,48 %; 45,12 ± 2,31 %) while quantity of potassium, sodium, and calcium was increased. The violation of content of macroelements combined with destructive processes and violation of blood circulation were in explored organs and tissues. Objective: This study aims to define the incidence of unexpected occult uterine sarcomas among women who underwent hysterectomy for benign indications at our teaching hospital. Patients who were found to have uterine sarcoma on histopathologic examination were considered to have an occult uterine sarcoma. Method: A total of 3008 hysterectomies for benign gynecologic indications were performed between 2000 and 2015. The most common indications for hysterectomy were leiomyomas and abnormal uterine bleeding. Results: Among these 3008 hysterectomies, 11 patients were found to have uterine sarcoma, with an overall rate 1 in 270 (0.37 %). These malignancies included six leiomyosarcomas, four endometrial stromal sarcomas (3 cases were high-grade, and 1 cases were low-grade), and one Müllerian adenosarcoma. High-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma was the dominant subtype. Median age was 51 years (range 45-68). Among women found to have occult sarcoma, hysterectomies was performed as a primary indication for leiomyomas (75 %) and abnormal bleeding (25 %). There was no evidence of malignancy in the preoperative histologic examination of the endometrium of these patients. Of these 12 patients, 9 were treated by open hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. 3 of these patients underwent total laparascopic hysterectomy. Conclusion: As a result, the total incidence of uterine sarcoma among patients operated on for benign indication is low in our population (0.37 % or 1 in 270). The FDA estimates that 0.3 % of all women undergoing hysterectomy for the treatment of myomas are found to have an unexpected uterine sarcoma. No reliable predictors of uterine sarcoma present and attention is warranted in preoperative planning for hysterectomy. Objective: An increasing number of extra-colonic neoplasms are being described in Lynch Syndrome patients. Uveal melanoma is not included in Lynch Syndrome tumour spectrum, despite evidence suggesting a role of microsatellite instability in its sporadic tumourigenesis. In this work we aim to describe a patient with Lynch Syndrome that presented an ovarian uveal melanoma metastasis. Method: The patient was referred for genetic counseling at 45 years-old due to a family history of Lynch Syndrome (MLH1 mutated). She underwent enucleation of her right eye at age 25 due to a uveal melanoma which recurred as an ovarian metastasis 22 years later. Histological, immunohistochemical and molecular study of the tumour was performed. Results: The uveal melanoma ovarian metastasis differed from the primary tumour by exhibiting frequent pseudo-follicles, increased cytological atypia, edema, hemorrhage and necrosis. It showed loss of MLH1/PMS2 protein immunoexpression and high microsatellite instability. No MLH1 promoter methylation nor BRAF mutation were found. Conclusion: We conclude that the patient's uveal melanoma tumourigenesis was most likely related to the MLH1 germline mutation. To the best of our knowledge this is the first report of a uveal melanoma showing MLH1/PMS2 protein loss in the context of Lynch Syndrome. Objective: Vascular invasion (VI) is a well-established marker for outcome in endometrial cancer. Our aim is to explore whether type of VI, defined as lymphatic (LVI) or blood vascular invasion (BVI) influences the pattern of metastasis. Method: From a prospectively collected cohort we selected three groups of endometrial carcinoma patients: 56 with positive lymph nodes at primary surgery (LN+), 44 with negative lymph nodes, and recurrent disease (LN-R+), and 100 with negative lymph nodes, and no recurrence (LN-R-). Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining with D2-40 and CD31 antibodies was used to differentiate between lymphatic and blood vessels. Objective: To optimise use of tissue microarray (TMA) for immunohistochemical (IHC) staining in endometrial cancer (EC), in preoperative endometrial samples and hysterectomy specimens. Method: Cores of preoperative and hysterectomy specimens of 14 EC and three atypical hyperplasia cases were collected in TMA blocks. Two 0.6 mm, and two 2.0 mm cores were used from each sample. Different antibodies were tested in TMAs and compared with results of whole slides of hysterectomy. Tested antibodies: ER, PR, p53, Ki-67, MLH1, PMS2, MSH2, MSH6, ARID1A, stathmin, IMP3, L1CAM, PTEN, beta-catenin, p16. Results: Overall, 2.0 mm cores were more assessable for evaluation than 0.6 mm cores (95.7 % versus 77.5 %, p < 0.001). Most antibodies had a substantial to good agreement between hysterectomy TMA and whole slide, with exception of those with heterogeneous expression: PR, Ki-67, stathmin, beta-catenin, p16. Preoperative TMAs showed for most antibodies moderate to perfect agreement with hysterectomy TMAs. There were more cases with positive staining on preoperative TMA and negative hysterectomy TMA than conversely. Conclusion: Agreement between TMA and whole slide, and preoperative and hysterectomy TMAs varied per antibody. Based on the more frequent loss of cores with smaller core size, 2.0 mm cores are the preferred size for IHC studies in EC. Objective: Aim of the study is to determine the impact of clinicopathological parameters on recurrence and survival of patients with vulvar cancer. Method: Patients (n = 175) with squamous vulvar cancer where retrospectively analyzed and further evaluated regarding the prognostic significance of different clinicopathologic variables, including: age, diameter and location of the lesion, depth of invasion, grade, lymphovascular space involvement (LVSI), perineural invasion, pattern of invasion and presence of VIN. Time to recurrence was recorded; disease free survival and overall survival were calculated. Results: Among all tumour related variables multiple analysis showed that the number of positive lymph nodes (LN) was the only independently associated risk factor for recurrence. Additionally, increased depth of invasion, tumour thickness, invasive or spray invasive pattern, perineural invasion and LVSI were associated with greater risk for recurrence. Also, multiple Cox regression analysis showed that age at diagnosis, free surgical margins and the total number of positive lymph nodes were independently associated with survival. Conclusion: Lymph node metastasis and status of surgical margins were confirmed to be independent predictors for poor prognosis in patients with vulvar cancer. Furthermore, number of positive lymph nodes, spray invasive pattern and perineural invasion correlated with increased risk for recurrence. PS-10-013 Undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma: Experience with cases from a single cancer center M. Al-Hussaini * , S. Al-Louh * King Hussein Cancer Center, Dept. of Pathology, Amman, Jordan Objective: Undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma (UEC) is a rare and poorly recognized entity. Method: Retrospective study on cases diagnosed as UEC. Results: A total of 17 cases were identified, with a median age of 60 years. Post-menopausal bleeding was the most common symptom. TAH and BSO was the most common treatment (n = 12, 80.0 %). Nine (52.9 %) patients received adjuvant treatment. The median overall survival was 9 months. Grossly, the tumours were mostly friable fungating/ polypoid masses (n = 7, 46.7 %), involving the lower uterine segment or cervix in 7 (46.7 %) cases. Pure UEC was seen in 7 cases (41.2 %), while de-differentiated carcinoma in 6(35.3 %). UEC was part of the epithelial component of carcinosarcoma in 3 (17.6 %) cases and was mixed with serous carcinoma in a single case. In all cases but one (n = 16, 94.1 %) focal strong positivity for one or more of the cytokeratins was evident. Vimentin was positive in 9 cases (81.8 %). P16 was diffuse and strong in the undifferentiated component in 6 (50.0 %) cases, while P53 was diffusely positive in 5 (38.5 %). Only 2 out of 11 (18.2 %) referral cases were correctly diagnosed as UEC. Conclusion: UEC is a rare tumour that is frequently mis-diagnosed. Applying the right immunostains helps establishing the correct diagnosis . Amplification of SOX2 transcription factor is strongly related to HPV status of vulvar carcinomas A. Gut * , H. Moch, M. Choschzick * University Hospital Zurich, Institute for Surgical Pathology, Switzerland Objective: SRY box 2 protein (SOX2) is a transcription factor mainly implicated in stem cell differentiation. The aim of our study was to analyze SOX2 expression along with copy number changes in a large set of vulvar carcinomas. Method: For immunohistochemical detection of SOX2, we used a rabbit monoclonal anti-SOX2 antibody (clone EPR3131, Epitomics Inc.). Copy number changes of SOX2 were analyzed by commercially available probes according standard procedures (Zytovision, ZytoLight SPEC SOX2/CEN3). Analysis of the HPV status was done with RNA in situ hybridization, utilizing specific probes against pan HPV (ViewRNA, Affymetrix Inc.). Results: SOX2 was immunohistological detectable in 30/55 (54.5 %) specimens. Amplification of SOX2 was observed in 10/48 (20.8 %) specimens with a valid FISH signal. Furthermore, SOX2 overexpression and amplification were both strongly related to positive HPV status. Tumours which were positive with pan HPV probes in RNA in situ hybridization showed significantly more frequent high SOX2 expression levels as well as amplification than tumours not associated to HPV (57 vs. 18 %, p < 0.01 and 40 vs. 9.5 %, p = 0.02). Conclusion: SOX2 overexpression and amplification is strongly related to HPV associated vulvar carcinomas. Our results may give new insights in the molecular pathogenesis of HPV related vulvar cancers. Objective: The diagnostic issues raised by primary ovarian mucinous tumours (POMT) are of two types: the exclusion of metastasis and the grading. The aims of our work were to determine whether immunohistochemistry (IHC) may assist in tumour grading and provide a simple tool to differentiate between primary and metastastic mucinous ovarian tumours. Method: We studied 29 cases: 12 metastasis and 17 POMT, including 7 cystadenomas, 6 borderline tumours and 4 carcinomas, in a prospective study performed between 2014 and 2015. Objective: In cytology specimens, parakeratotic cells are either isolated or in sheets and resemble small superficial squamous cells. The cytoplasm, however, is more dense than a normal superficial squamous cell, and the nuclei can be more hyperchromatic with variation in size and shape. Method: A total of 1268 women with normal cytology were included in the study. Out of 1268 cases, 390 cases were reported as normal cytology with parakeratosis, and 878 cases were reported as normal cytology without parakeratosis. Cervista HPV HR test was performed using these samples. Thirty-four women were referred for colposcopy. Results: HPV infection was detected in 101 of 390 cases with parakeratosis (25.9 %), and in 130 of 878 cases without parakeratosis (14.8 %) . Rate of HPV positivity was higher in women with parakeratosis compared to women without parakeratosis (p < 0.001). The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of presence of parakeratosis in normal cytology were 28.57, 80, 50, 61.54 %, respectively. The presence of parakeratosis has high specificity for detection of CIN2+ in histological follow up. Conclusion: Presence of parakeratosis in normal cytology is correleated with the cases of HPV infection,which has high specifity for detection of CIN 2+ in histological follow-up. The rate of high-risk Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) in cervical cytology and its relationship to the CIN2+ lesion G. Objective: High grade (HGSOC) and low grade (LGSOC) serous ovarian carcinomas are now known to be tumours with different pathogenesis and outcomes. We investigated tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL), expression of PD-L1 and density of CD8+ lymphocytes in ovarian and peritoneal locations. Method: Whole tissue sections from 25 HGSOC and 10 LGSOC primitive locations were studied, with paired peritoneal lesions in 8 and 9 cases respectively. Automated immunohistochemistry was performed. Presence of TIL and PD-L1 expression in tumour cells (TC) and immune cells (IC) were semi-quantitatively assessed. Image analysis was performed to quantitatively assess density of CD8+ cells. LGSOC were characterized by lower density of TIL and CD8+ lymphocytes than HGSOC in ovarian location. Higher densities of CD8+ infiltration were observed in peritoneal locations in both LGSOC and HGSOC, with a high intertumour and intratumour heterogeneity. PD-L1 expression was not observed in LGSOC whereas 8/24 were positive for TC and 9/24 positive for IC in HGSOC. No correlation was found with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and BRCA mutation status. LGSOC is characterized by lower CD8+ infiltration and absence of PD-L1 expression as compared to HGSOC. Our study highlights tumour heterogeneity for these immune markers between ovarian and peritoneal locations. Circulating serum interleukin-18 and interleukin-10 levels in early diagnosis of ovarian carcinoma patients: A case control study S. Tiwari * , A. Verma, N. Tiwari, R. K. Srivastava, P. Singh, D. Tripathi, P. L. Sankhwar, A. Dwivedi * King George's Medical University, Dept. of Physiology, Lucknow, India Objective: The aim of this study was exploring the diagnostic role of IL-18, IL-10 and its role in ovarian carcinoma. Method: A total number of 420 subjects were enrolled in the study after approval of the institutional ethics committee. Out of 420 subjects, 210 biopsy approved patients were included in the study and grouped into various stages as per TMN classification, age and ethnicity matched 210 healthy subjects were recruited as controls within the age range of 20-60 years. Peripheral blood samples of all patients and age matched controls were obtained at baseline and estimation of IL-18 and IL-10 was done by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Data were analyzed with appropriate statistical tools like ANOVA and Graph PAD. Results: The baseline levels of IL-10 and IL-18 in all groups of ovarian carcinoma were found to be significantly (p < 0.05) higher than the control group. The levels of IL-18 and IL-10 also found to be elevated significantly in stage T3 (p < 0.05) and T4 (p < 0.05) as compared to stage T2. The levels of IL-18 is found to be well associated with progression of disease of various groups (r = 0.80, p < 0.05). In contrast, IL-10 showed significant direct association with progression of carcinoma (r = 0.85, p < 0.05). Conclusion: Study concluded that serum IL-18 is a better diagnostic marker with higher specificity and sensitivity. IL-10 may be valuable as a prognostic marker in ovarian carcinoma but still more studies on larger sample size is needed for its validation. Objective: Uterine sex cord stromal tumours are rare, and are divided into endometrial stromal tumours with sex cord like elements (ESTSCLE), and Uterine tumours resembling ovarian sex cord tumours (UTROSCT). The aim of the study is to see histomorphological features of uterine sex cord stromal tumours. Method: From January 2004 to Mid April 2016, we found 8 cases of uterine stromal tumours in our files (3-ESTSCLE, 4-UTROSCT, and one was labelled as mixed stromal-smooth muscle tumour with true sex cord differentiation). Results: The mean age was 39.3 years (median 38). All ESTSCLE showed typical low grade ESS areas with sex cord elements in trabecular/retifrom pattern. All were positive for ER,PR, CD10. One case had history of carcinoma breast; the same case also showed paraaortic lymph node metastasis. All URTOSCT showed nests, cords, trabeculae. Calretinin, inhibin, MIC-2 were used as sex cord markers (MIC-2 being positive in ¾ cases). EMA was consistently negative. One case showed aortocaval, pelvic nodal metastasis; another showed necrosis, mitotic count of 20/10 hpf and was deemed malignant. Conclusion: ESTSCLE and UTROSCT are rare uterine tumours. The former behaves as low grade sarcoma; whereas the later, should also be regarded as low grade malignant tumour. Follow up is required. Objective: the GeneXpert-HPV-assay® is a validated genotyping test of Human Papilloma Virus for cervical cytologic samples based on the cartridge. The aim was to determine the suitability of an easy method of extraction of HPV nucleic-acid (NA) from FFPE cervical-biopsy for genotyping with GeneXpert-HPV-assay®. Method: a total of 53 cervical biopsies with clinical history HPV-HR infections were extrapolated from cervical cancer screening database (Negative:20 cases, ASC-US:10 cases, L-SIL:14 cases, H-SIL:9 cases) and 10 μm sections were assessed. The sections were deparaffinised with Xylene in oven, pretreated with 4 cycles in microwave-oven with Citrate buffer at pH6 (Dako®), than treated with Proteinase-K at 37°C (Vysis-Protease-Abbott®). Tissue slices were detached from the slides, suspended in fixative solution (PreservCyte-Hologic® Objective: Thyroid-type papillary carcinoma and strumal carcinoid are the most common neoplasms arising in struma ovarii. However, the coexistence of papillary thyroid carcinoma and strumal carcinoid is extremely rare. Method: We experienced a case of papillary thyroid microcarcinoma arising in strumal carcinoid. Results: A 40-year old female presented with a 6 cm-sized, left ovarian solid mass. The cut surface was yellow to white and fibrotic. Microscopically, the tumour was composed of a follicular variant of papillary thyroid microcarcinoma and a strumal carcinoid. The carcinoid tumour was an admixture of trabecular carcinoid and colloid-containing, thyroid follicle-like structure lined by carcinoid cells. The follicleforming carcinoid cells showed both thyroid and neuroendocrine differentiation (positive for TTF-1, thyroglobulin, CD56, chromogranin and synaptophysin). Benign thyroid follicles or teratoma were not identified. Our patient showed no evidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis at 10 year follow-up. Conclusion: Strumal carcinoid is universally benign, with rare exceptions. Thyroid-type carcinoma arising in strumal carcinoid should not be diagnosed as malignant strumal carcinoid to avoid suboptimal treatment and miscommunication. The prognosis of papillary thyroid carcinoma arising in strumal carcinoid is still unclear because of its rarity, but might have a favorable prognosis. Variables predicting persistent and/or recurrent squamous intraepithelial lesions of the cervix after large loop excision of transformation zone D. Šekoranja * , K. Rebek, U. Salobir Gajšek, A. Repše Fokter, S. Šramek Zatler * General Hospital Celje, Pathology, Tabor, Slovenia Objective: The intent of this study was to determine variables that may predict the rate of persistence and/or recurrence of squamous intraepithelial lesions (SIL) of the cervix in patients undergoing the large loop excision of transformation zone (LLETZ) procedure. Method: We performed a retrospective review of histological results of all women treated by LLETZ procedure at General Hospital Celje from January 2013 until December 2015. Results: Residual and/or persistent disease was observed in 8.9 % (58/653) of women included in our study. Multivariate analysis showed patients' age, positive endocervical and overall excision margins and worse definitive histological diagnosis (high grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or invasive carcinoma) to be statistically significant (p < 0.001) in predicting higher recurrence/persistence rate, whereas positive ectocervical excision margin was not quite statistically significant (p = 0.0447) and cone depth was not statistically significant at all (p = 0.181). Conclusion: Majority of our findings are in accordance with results of other studies reported so far. Different variables can help identify an important subset of women requiring careful follow-up after LLETZ procedure to successfully treat persistent or recurrent disease. Along with the malignant component, some parts of the cyst walls were lined by squamous and columnar epithelium. Nine months after the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma, multiple metastasis to liver, lymph nodes and skin developed and the patient died 2 years after the first diagnosis. Conclusion: SCT should be considered in the differential diagnosis of presacral tumours in adult age group. Complete resection and close followup is crucial for the patient management due to its rare but fatal consequences. Objective: Main objective of the study was to define whether endometrial expression of HOXA-10, HOXA-11 and Leukemia Inhibitory Factor (LIF) with its receptor (LIF-R) is significantly different between fertile and infertile women during implantation window. Method: >Women having delivered at least one alive newborn were the study's control group (fertile, group 1) while infertile women the patients' group (infertile, group 2). An endometrial biopsy was obtained on 7th-8th postovulatory day. Expression of HOXA-10, HOXA-11, LIF and LIF-R was assessed in both epithelial and stromal cells by immunohistochemistry. Primary outcome was h-score. Results: Endometrial tissue was obtained by 20 fertile and 55 infertile women (22 with poor ovarian reserve, 13 with tubal infertility, 5 with endometriosis and 15 with unexplained infertility). Mean age was 31.1 + −4.8 years for group 1 and 37.5 + −3.8 for group 2 (P = .001). LIF and LIF-R h-score was significantly decreased in epithelial cells of infertile women compared with fertile controls (P = .05 and P = .006 respectively). No significant difference was observed regarding HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 epithelial endometrial expression as well as stromal expression of all molecules between two groups. LIF, LIF-R and HOXA-11 epithelial hscore presented their lowest values in women with unexplained infertility. Conclusion: Endometrial expression of LIF, LIF-R and HOXA-11 but not HOXA-10 is significantly impaired in women with unexplained infertility during implantation window. Our results indicate the significant role of HOXA-11, LIF and LIF-R in the aitiopathogenetic drawback complex of unexplained infertility. Objective: Main objective was to study whether endometrial expression of Progesterone receptors type A and B and integrins avb3 differ significantly between fertile and infertile as well as within sub-groups of infertility during implantation window. Method: Women having delivered at least one alive newborn during the last year consisted the control group (group 1) while infertile the patients' group (group 2). Infertile were also categorized to those with ovarian failure (group 2a), tubal factor (group 2b), endometriosis (2c) or unexplained infertility (group 2d). Endometrial biopsy was obtained by Pipelle on 7th-8th postovulatory day. Total progesterone receptors' (TPR), type-B receptors' (PRB) and integrins' avb3 expression was evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Primary outcome was h-score. Results: Endometrial tissue was obtained by 20 fertile and 55 infertile women. Mean age was 31.1 ± 4.8 years for group 1 and 37.5 ± 3.8 for group 2 (P = .001). TPR and PRB expression was significantly decreased in epithelial cells of infertile women compared with fertile. No significant difference was observed in the epithelial expression of integrins avb3 (P = .52). Furthermore, no significant difference was observed regarding the expression of any biomarker in stromal cells. When adjusting for the cause of infertility, TPR and PRB epithelial expression were significantly decreased in sub-groups 2a and 2d. Conclusion: Progesterone receptors' but not integrins' expression is significantly decreased in epithelial cells of women with unexplained infertility and poor ovarian reserve. Endometrial biopsy should be performed in all women intending to perform IVF in order to evaluate endometrial receptivity. Tubal-peritoneal junction as a trigger zone for high-grade serous carcinoma pathogenesis A. Asaturova * , L. Adamyan, L. Ezhova, N. Fayzullina, G. Khabas * NACIP, Pathology, Moscow, Russia Objective: As many cancers occurs in transition zone between two types of epithelia tubal-peritoneal junction (TPJ) was also supposed to be predisposed for neoplastic changes. Method: 150 patients (195 FTs) with extraovarian pathology (n = 30) and ovarian tumours (n = 120) were recruited. All fimbrial parts of FTs were investigated extensively. FTs were investigated morphologically and immunohistochemically (p53,Ki-67,PgR,E-cadherin). Student test with Bonferroni correction was used for statistics. Results: 378 TPJ were verified. 40,6 % TPJ involved endosalpingeal plicae(43,6 % of them localized on the top of plica, 25,6 %-on the side of plica, 30,8 %-between plicae). Histologically TPJ was flat (52,1 %) convex (40,6 %), concave (7,3 %). Lymphatic/ blood vessels dilatation was diagnosed in most TPJ (closed to the basal membrane). Transition metaplasia was revealed in 33 %, Walthard nests-in 25 %, "ovarian" stroma adjunct to TPJ-in 2 % (out of TPJ-in 20 %). Serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) was diagnosed in patients with serous carcinoma (in 30 %). In 53,3 % of patients STIC was revealed adjunct to TPJ, in 33,3 %-in the fimbrial part of FT (out of TPJ), in 13,3 %-out of fimbrial part (p < 0,05). Conclusion: TPJ is supposed to be an analogue of the transition zones in other organs (gastro-esophageal, cervical squamo-columnar). Proximity of STIC to TPJ in most cases proved the hypothesis about TPJ to be a "hot spot" for pelvic high-grade serous ovarian carcinogenesis. The study results carried on the funds received from RFBR (Project 16 16-34-00666/16 Objective: Mesenchymal tumours are rarely encountered in the uterine cervix, where they constitute less than 1 % of all malignancies. We investigate the clinicopathological characteristics of 28 cases of mesenchymal tumours of the cervix. Method: A retrospective analysis of the clinical data and morphological features of 28 consecutive cases of mesenchymal cervical tumours diagnosed in our Departments between January 1995 and December 2015 was done. Results: The mean age of the patients were 47 (range, 29-63). Benign tumours are more frequent (17 cases). The most commonly reported benign mesenchymal tumours, listed in order of decreasing frequency, are leiomyoma (9 cases), fibro epithelial tumours (4 cases) lipoma (1 case), neurofibroma (1 case) and adenomyoma (1 case). The most commonly reported mesenchymal malignancies were leiomyosarcoma (8 cases) associated to rhabdomyosarcoma, adenosarcoma and undifferenciated sarcoma reported with almost equal frequency (1 case). Conclusion: Each of the aforementioned lesions is associated with a relatively distinct clinicopathologic profile. Distinction between these entities is important because therapeutic care and prognosis differ, and each case must be evaluated within the context of the reported cases of that specific histologic subtype. Histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and PhosphoHDAC4/5/7 expression in uterine carcinosarcomas J. Ferreira * , R. Luz, F. Silva, A. Félix * IPO Lisboa FG, Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Portugal Objective: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are critical regulators of gene expression and have been shown to be overexpressed in many human malignancies, including uterine carcinomas and sarcomas. HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) are promising therapeutic agents. We aim to characterize HDAC1,2,3,4,6 and PhosphoHDAC4/5/7(PhosphoHDAC) immunoprofiles in the different morphological components of uterine carcinosarcomas(UCS) and its association with clinicopathological parameters. Method: HDAC1,2,3,4,6 and PhosphoHDAC immunohistochemistry was performed in tissue microarrays using 55 UCS and 17 UCS metastases from 55 patients(462 cores). Quantitative and qualitative score were evaluated and combined into an immunoreactivity score. Results: HDAC1,2,3,4 and 6 were expressed in the majority of tumours[HDAC2(80 %) > HDAC4(78 %) > HDAC1(71 %) > HDAC3(55 %) > HDAC6(53 %)], albeit with different immunoreactivity mean scores[HDAC4(7.04) > HDAC2(6.25) > HDAC1(5.15) > HDAC3(4.44) > HDAC6(2.84)]. There was a strong positive significant correlation of expression of HDAC1,2 and 3 between the epithelial and mesenchymal components(rs > 0,5, p < 0,001), although immunoreactivity scores of HDAC1, PhosphoHDAC(cyt) and HDAC6 were significantly higher in the epithelial component (p < 0,05). A strong positive correlation between the expression of HDAC3 and HDAC1,2 and 4 and between phosphoHDAC and HDAC1 and 4 (rs > 0.5, p < 0.001) was found. Increased expression of HDAC4 in the mesenchymal component was independently associated with an improved overall survival on univariate analysis (p < 0.05). Objective: To examine sites and patterns of disease in low-stage tuboovarian high grade serous carcinoma (HGSC). FIGO staging encompasses primary site ascertainment (tubal/ovarian/peritoneal). This is difficult in advanced cases where multiple sites are involved. Less than 10 % of extrauterine HGSC present at stage I/II. Early stage cases allow assessment of disease before wide dissemination, with implications for specimen handling, staging and site assignment. Method: Anonymised pathology reports of 67 Stage I and II HGSCs from 6 teaching hospitals were analysed. Stage, sites/pattern of involvement, site/size of largest focus and laterality of tubal and ovarian involvement were recorded. Results: Ovarian involvement without any tubal component was only present in 12/67 (18 %). Bilateral ovarian involvement (66 %) was significantly higher than bilateral tubal involvement (13 %) (p = 0.012, Fisher's exact test). There is a trend towards fewer stage I compared to stage II tumours in this study in comparison with historic series. Conclusion: Identification of tubal disease in 82 % cases, and significantly higher bilateral (suggesting metastasis) ovarian as compared to tubal involvement, both support a tubal origin of most HGSC. Detailed tubal sampling according to current protocols will alter stage distribution in low-stage disease, through detection of microscopic tubal involvement in apparent stage I cases. Objective: To evaluate the presence of neoangiogenesis and epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) markers expression in Paget disease of the vulva (PDV) and to verify their role in the pathogenesis of the disease and as potential predictors of recurrence. Method: 18 cases of PDV, including 10 invasive cases, were analysed for microvessels density (MVD) using CD31 immunohistochemical staining and for the expression of E-/ N-cadherin, b-catenin and SLUG. Hot spots of neovascularisation containing the highest number of capillaries and small venules were identified at low power, five fields in each section with the highest number of hot spots were selected. The highest vessel density (HVD) and the average vessel density (AVD) of five fields at ×200 and ×400 was recorded. Results: AVD at 200x and 400x and HVD at 400x were significantly associated with invasive PDV (p = 0.029, 0.05, 0.033 respectively), whereas N-cadherin expression showed a trend with invasive disease (p = 0.063). No significant relation between MDV and EMT-markers expression and recurrence rate at 6, 12 and 24 months was found. Conclusion: These results show that neoangiogenesis, measured as MVD, may be involved in the growth and progression of PDV. EMT could also be related to invasion but larger series are needed. The cervical smear epithelial cell abnormality data of 354,725 patients from 38 pathology laboratories and 45 hospitals in Turkey I. Turkmen * , Turkish Pathology Federation-Gynaecopathology Working Group * Istanbul Medipol University, Pathology, Turkey Objective: There is no other screening program to have the success of PAPtest. Cervical cytology constitutes a large workload so that quality control in cervical cytology is important for the quality assurance (QA) of the pathology laboratories.In this study, we aimed to collect the cervical cytology results from all over Turkey, and discuss the parameters influencing the quality of the PAPtest. Method: The study proposal was conducted with Turkish gynecopathology working group and 38 centers (totally 45 hospitals) from 24 different cities agreed to contribute. Study was designed to cover the cervical cytology results during 2013. We conducted an online questionnaire and evaluate the results. Results: The total number of ECA was 18,020 and the global Epithelial Cell Abnormality(ECA) rate was 5,08 % in the total 354,725 smears and among centers, 0,3-16,64 %. The ASC/SIL ratios changed 0,21-13,94 with an average 2,61. When the centers were asked whether they perform QA studies, 25 centers shared the information, only 11 had a such control study. Conclusion: There is an increase in ECA rate. There are great differences among centers. Quality control studies including ASC/SIL is important. Corrective and preventive action according to quality control parameters is a must. Cervical cytology subspeciality in every center can be imaginary but dedicated pathologists to the cervical cytology should be discussed. Objective: To determine the epidemiological, clinicopathological characteristics and outcome of uterine low grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LGESS) in Central Tunisia. Method: It is a retrospective study of 8 cases of LGESS collected from the Cancer Registry of central Tunisia over a 10-year-period (1996) (1997) (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) . Results: Age ranged from 26 to 52 years. The most common symptom was menometrorrhagia. Clinical examination revealed an enlarged uterus, vaginal bleeding andleucorrhoea in respectively 4, 2 and 1 cases. At imaging, initial diagnosis was in all the cases a leimyoma. The final diagnosis was established after endometrial biopsies, curettings or on hysterectomy surgical specimens. At immunohistochemistry: CD10, desmin and WT1 were positive in respectively 6, 4 and 5 cases. SMAwas positive in 7 cases. According to the FIGO classification, the tumour stage was: IA in 3 cases, IC in 4 cases and IIB in one case. All patients underwent hysterectomy. Adjuvant treatment included chemotherapy for 2 patients and radiation therapy for 4 patients. Hormonal therapy was indicated for one patient. Five patiens had a favorable outcome and 3 died. LGESS is a malignant uncommon tumour, occuring in young to middle-aged women, with no specific symptomatology. Its diagnosis is histopathological. LGSC. Both maspin and CD138 scores varied significantly between studied groups and were positively correlated with adverse prognostic factors in studied carcinomas including FIGO stage, Ki67 proliferation index. Besides, both maspin and CD138 had significant correlation to each other. Conclusion: These findings suggest that epithelial cytoplasmic expression of maspin and CD138 may have a significant role in tumourigenesis in ovarian high grade serous carcinomas and clear cell carcinomas; these markers may regulate tumour cell proliferation and their significant correlation to each other may suggest that CD138 probably induces maspin expression to protect tumour growth factors from being lysed by proteolytic enzymes. The role of estrogen receptor subtypes (alpha, beta and GPR30) in endometrial carcinogenesis H. Özakinci * , S. Yuksel, C. Cansiz Ersoz, D. Kankaya * Ankara, Turkey Objective: Endometrioid adenocarcinomas are estrogen (ER) dependent cancers and preceded by atypical hyperplasia under hyperestrogenic effect. The purpose of the study was to evaluate the alterations of estrogen receptor subtypes (ERα, ERβ and more recently defined G-proteincoupled estrogen receptor-GPR30) on endometrial hyperplasia-carcinoma sequence and their potential role on the endometrial effects of Tamoxifen (TAM) treatment. Method: 30 normal endometrium, 45 endometrial hyperplasia, 30 endometrioid carcinoma, 30 endometrial polyps (15 TAM related polyp) were included in the study. Immunohistochemistry was performed by using ERα, ERβ and GPR30 antibodies and immunoreactivity scores were calculated for each case by multiplying the percentage of positive cells by the intensity of staining. Results: GPR30 expression showed statistically significant increase (p = 0.00) on the endometrial hyperplasia-carcinoma sequence whereas no such relation was found for ERα or ERβ. Endometrial polyps related with prolonged TAM treatment (≥3 years) showed significantly lower ERβ expression (p = 0.02) and higher GPR30 expression (p > 0.05) than TAM unrelated polyps. Conclusion: GPR30 receptor seems to play a role on endometrial carcinogenesis and TAM induced endometrial abnormalities. And it may be speculated that the ERβ receptor downregulation contributes to the proliferative effects of TAM on endometrium, as its antiproliferative effects by interacting other estrogene receptors have been shown by some studies. Objective: We aimed to present clinicopathological features and of cases diagnosed with malignant tumour associated with ovarian mature teratoma. Method: Single-institution retrospective charts were reviewed to identify all cases of ovarian mature teratoma diagnosed from 1998 to 2015. Results: A total of 218 ovarian mature teratoma cases were identified during the study period. Of the 218 ovarian mature teratoma specimens, eight (3.7 %) exhibited malignant tumours. The average age for cases of malignancy associated with ovarian mature teratoma was 44.6 years. The average size of tumours was 10.36 cm. On final pathology, histological types of tumours were as follows: two cases each of squamous cell carcinoma and papillary thyroid carcinoma; one case each of mucinous adenocarcinoma, metastatic adenocarcinoma, sebaceous carcinoma and oligodendroglioma. Only one patient died of disease. One patient was alive with metastatic disease 2 months after initial diagnosis. Mean and median follow-up times were 64.1 and 49 months, respectively. Conclusion: An ovarian mass that has characteristics of a teratoma in a postmenopausal patient should alert for malignancy -regardless of tumour size. Intraoperative consultation is a valuable tool for the detection of malignancy and should be requested to determine the modality of surgical approach. Objective: Our study aimed to analyze caveolin expression in ovarian cancer (OC), in correlation with clinico-morphological parameters and survival. Method: 64 cases of OC histopathologically diagnosed as serous (44 cases), endometrioid (7 cases), clear cells (2 cases), mucinous (9 cases), and undifferentiated (2 cases) were immunohistochemically processed using anti-caveolin antibody. Semi-quantitative evaluation was based on two criteria: positive cells percentage and staining intensity. Results: Caveolin expression was positive in 26 cases (40.62 %), of which 18 were serous, 4 cases-endometrioid and 4-mucinous carcinoma. Intensity of reaction was mostly moderate or weak. 38 cases (59.38 %) were negative. We recorded caveolin positivity in 5 of 12 cases graded G1, 12 of 24 cases graded G2 and 9 of 26 cases graded G3. Caveolin was positive in 8 of 18 cases in stage I, 3 of 6 cases in stage II and 15 of 40 cases in stage III. Statistical analysis revealed significant differences only between caveolin expression and disease free survival for stage III (p = 0.01). Conclusion: Our data supports the heterogeneity of caveolin expression in accordance with histologic subtype, tumour grade and stage. Loss of caveolin expression may be assessed as indicator for tumour progression. Objective: Chronic endometritis is associated with abnormal uterine bleeding and infertility. The gold standard is identification of plasma cells, but this can be difficult. CD 138 immunostain is helpful in identifying plasma cells, but adds time and expense. It has been suggested that the more easily identified eosinophils are a surrogate marker for plasma cells. We hypothesized that eosinophils are not a specific marker of chronic endometritis. Method: The Pathology database at University Hospital, Newark NJ, was searched for cases of chronic endometritis from 1/1/91-8/1/15. Controls were endometrial biopsies that were proliferative or showed disordered proliferation. Slides were evaluated to confirm the prior diagnosis, and to determine the presence of eosinophils. Results: 50 cases and 50 controls were reviewed. Sixty-two percent of cases had eosinophils present and 38 % did not whereas in controls 38 % had eosinophils and 62 % did not (Fisher's exact test p = 0.03). Conclusion: While eosinophils were more likely seen in chronic endometritis, they were frequently seen in controls as well. The presence of eosinophils is not a specific marker of chronic endometritis. Objective: There are two etio-pathogenic pathways for the development of vulvar squamous cell carcinomas (VSCC), one associated with infection by human papillomavirus (HPV); and another independent of HPV. We aimed to determine whether there are any differential characteristics between the two types in a large series of tumours. Objective: "Invasive micropapillary serous carcinoma" has been proposed as a synonym for low-grade serous carcinoma (LG-SC) . Although it appears that invasive micropapillary areas in some serous carcinomas exhibit high-grade nuclear atypia, the molecular features of such tumours have not been well characterized. The aim of this study was to verify appropriateness of using the term "invasive micropapillary serous carcinoma" as a synonym for LG-SC. Method: We selected 24 "serous carcinomas with conspicuous invasive micropapillary pattern (SC-IMPs)" and investigated: 1) their morphological features, 2) the immunostaining pattern of p53 protein, and 3) KRAS/BRAF/TP53 gene mutations. The 24 SC-IMPs were subdivided into low-grade and high-grade tumours based primarily on the nuclear atypia, with the mitotic rate used as a secondary feature: low-grade (n = 5), high-grade (n = 19). Low-grade SC-IMPs were characterized by low mitotic activity, absence of abnormal mitosis, presence of serous borderline tumour, occasional BRAF mutation, and infrequent TP53 mutation. High-grade SC-IMPs were characterized by high mitotic activity, presence of abnormal mitosis, conventional high-grade serous carcinoma (HG-SC), frequent TP53 mutation and lack of KRAS/BRAF mutation. Conclusion: Using the term "invasive micropapillary serous carcinoma" as a synonym for LG-SC is misleading, since HG-SC can show conspicuous invasive micropapillary pattern. Objective: To differentiate molar (complete hydatidiform mole (CHM) and partial hydatidiform mole (PHM)) and non molar pregnancies on the basis of routine histopathological criteria and expression pattern of p57Kip2 by immunohistochemistry. Also, to determine whether any of these features can predict clinical behavior and progression to persistent gestational trophoblastic disease (PGTD). Method: Archival materials of 65 cases of products of conceptions (POCs) were revised histopathologically. The tissue sections were also stained immunohistochemically with antibodies against p57Kip2. Follow-up data concerning progression to PGTD were investigated. Results: Certain histopathological criteria were found significant in differentiation between CHM and PHM. These include villous shape and outline, villous trophoblastic hyperplasia and atypia at extravillous trophoblasts. P57Kip2 immunohistochemistry was statistically significant in diagnosis of CHM and distinguishing it from PHM and non molar cases. There were no significant differences in any morphological or immunohistochemical features between cases with or without subsequently developed of PGTD. The diagnosis of molar pregnancies should be stated after constellation of specific histopathological criteria, especially in early gestational age, in order not to miss a diagnosis of CHM. P57Kip2 immunohistochemistry is valuable in diagnosis of equivocal cases. However, there were no significant features to predict subsequent developed to PGTD. is found in diagnosing metastatic tumour. Meanwhile, FNAB has limitedness in diagnosing Non-Hodgkin lymphoma and Hodgkin lymphoma, with sensitivity for both less than 60 %. The utility of fascin and CD83 in the differential diagnosis of mediastinal large B-cell lymphomas Objective: Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma (CHL) and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) are the most common large cell lymphomas arising in the mediastinum and these diseases are thought to be closely related histogenetically. Although the distinction between CHL and PMBL is usually straightforward, some cases have overlapping features and qualify as mediastinal gray zone lymphoma (GZL). Fascin and CD83 are markers of histiocytic/dendritic cells that are frequently positive in CHL, but their expression in PMBL and GZL is less well known. Method: We retrospectively collected cases of PMBL, CHL and GZL from three institutions. Tissue sections prepared from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded blocks were stained with fascin and CD83 using routine immunohistochemical methods. Objective: MDS is a disorder of hematopoietic stem cell, which risks to progress in acute leukemia. It is essential a good prediction of the risk of the evolution towards acute leukemia (according to IPSS-R). Strong nuclear staining of the p53 protein by immunohistochemistry has been used as a surrogate marker for TP53 gene mutation. Method: 74 cases of bone marrow biopsies, with MDS have been examined. Sections of 4 μ were subjected to antigen retrieval with EDTA and immunohistochemistry with DO-7 antibody. Tuesday, 27 September 2016, 09.30-10.30, Hall 11.3 Results: the intensity and the percentage of staining were evaluated. The cases with moderate-strong intensity staining were 28: • 14 have hypercellularity of single series; • 14 have hyper-cellularity of two or more series; • 90 % of the medullary fibrosis increased. Conclusion: • p53 expression was present on bone marrow biopsies of patients, which alteration of a single or more series, while patients with alteration of the megakaryocytic series were immune-negative; • TP53 positivity predicted a worse prognosis and an higher risk class; • the increase of the medullary fibrosis indicates a minor survival possibilities. • The immunohistochemical expression of p53 was useful to assess the risk and the evolution of the MDS but was not enough to impact the overall survival. Clinicopathological characteristics and rituximab-plus cytotoxic therapies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and methotrexateassociated large B-lymphoproliferative disorders M. Takeshita Clinicopathological studies and prognosis were analysed in the 40 RA cases. Results: By ISH, EBV was detected in tumour cells of 25 in 40 RA patients with MTX-BLPD (63 %). Immunohistologically, BCL2 expression was detected in 35 % of patients with MTX-BLPD, which was lower than 93 % of control DLBCL patients (P < 0.01). Eleven patients with EBV-positive MTX-BLPD (44 %) showed remission after MTX withdrawal. In RA patients with clinical stage III/IV BLPD, 15 with rituximab (R)-plus cytotoxic therapies pursued better prognosis than 10 with Rminus cytotoxic therapies (P < 0.05). Among the 15 patients, seven with MTX-BLPD showed better overall survival than nine control DLBCL patients (P < 0.01). Conclusion: In RA patients with MTX-BLPD, immunosuppression by MTX, EBV infection and low BCL2 expression in tumour cells may play roles in tumourigenesis and tumour regression. R-plus cytotoxic therapies as well as MTX withdrawal were highly effective in these patients. Objective: Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a rare genetic disorder of disrupted lymphocyte homeostasis as a result of defective Fas-mediated apoptosis. Method: We report a case of ALPS in a 17-year-old male. At the age of 6, the patient had been diagnosed with hepatosplenic lymphoma following splenectomy. The patient was treated by chemotherapy followed by bone marrow transplantation and was in remission thereafter. At the age of 17, the patient presented with progressive lymphadenopathy in several regions, suggestive of relapse. Results: Histological and immunohistochemical analysis of the lymph node biopsy showed expansion of interfollicular zones and regressive changes of follicles. Flow cytometry of the lymph node and bone marrow aspirate revealed an aberrant subpopulation of double negative T-cells (CD3+, CD4-, CD8-). A suspicion of ALPS was raised. Genetic analysis showed that the patient was heterozygous for the c.179_188dup mutation in exon 2 of the FAS gene, confirming the diagnosis. As far as we are aware, this variant has not previously been reported in the literature. The initial splenectomy slides were reviewed, and the findings were reconsidered to be an expression of ALPS. Conclusion: We emphasize the need to consider the possibility of ALPS in patients with chronic lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. Expression of cyclin D1 and p53 protein as prognostic factor at different stages and beta-2 microglobulin level of multiple myeloma J. Nazarovs * , R. Kleina, S. Lejniece * Riga, Latvia Objective: was to find out is there any correlation between expression of Cyclin D1 and p53 in malignant plasma cells and clinical stage by Salmon -Durie (S-D) and beta-2 microglobulin level (B2MG) in multiple myeloma (MM). Method: 70 patients' bone marrow biopsies with primary diagnosed MM were examined for Cyclin D1 and p53. Statistical analyses were performed using Graph Pad Prism 5 software. Results: MM stages according to S-D system were: IA, B (20 %, n = 14): II A, B (43 %, n = 30): IIIA, B (73 %, n = 26). Patients mean age was 63.61+/− 10.81 years. Cyclin D1 positive patients group had statistically significant higher B2MG level (5.174+/−4.599 mg/dl) than those of the Cycin D1 negative group (p = 0.0462, unpaired t-test) land more late stages of MM by S-D (p = 0.0026, Mann Whitney U test). p53 positive cases were in later stages by S-D system than those with lack of p53 (p < 0.0001, Mann Whitney U test) and higher B2MG level 5.585+/ −4.675 mg/dl than those of the p53-negative group (p = 0.008, unpaired t-test). A positive correlation by Spearman test was found between Cyclin D1 expression, S-D staging system (r = +0.363; p = 0.002) and β2MG level (r = +0.2623; p = 0.0487) and also between p53 expression in PC and β2MKB level (r = +0.449; p = 0.0005). Forty burn patients were autopsied. Histologic sections from the bone marrow, liver and spleen were examined. We also searched and examined non-burn HLH cases during the same period. Results: A total of 3 patients were diagnosed with HLH in burn patients. One case did not have evidence of infection. The other two cases had multiple bacterial infections including Acinetobacter baumanni, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Aeromonas hydrophila, Stenotrophomonas maltophila and Klebsiella pneumoniae. All cases had evidence of hemophagocytosis with activated macrophages in the bone marrow, liver and spleen, >70 % total burn surface area (TBSA), and serum ferritin >10,000 ng/ml. Twelve cases of HLH were diagnosed in patients without burns. Associated conditions included multiple bacterial (Gram negative sepsis), fungal (Fusarium, Absidia, Actinomucor, Histoplasma) and Herpes viruses (EBV, CMV and VZV). None of the HLH cases (burn or non-burn groups) were diagnosed pre-mortem. Conclusion: Secondary HLH results from overactivation of the diffuse mononuclear phagocyte system due to a strong cytokine/chemokine response to a variety of systemic viral infections such as EBV and CMV. More rarely, other viral, bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial agents have been implicated. To the best of our knowledge, HLH has been reported in a single case of a severely burn patient. HLH is difficult to diagnose premortem and requires a high index of suspicion. Its clinical presentation overlaps with septicemia and systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Prospective studies are currently underway in order to clarify the possible association between severe burns and HLH. Objective: Castleman's disease (CD) is a lymphoproliferative disorder with unknown etiology, which can be associated with either local or systemic nonspecific symptoms. Therefore CD may not be thought priorly in differential diagnosis by both clinician and pathologist. In present study, patients with CD diagnosed in our institute were examined for prediagnosis, histopathology and clinical findings. Method: Fifty patients with CD diagnosed between 1990 and 2015 were reevaluated retrospectively in terms of clinical and histopathological findings. Results: The mean age was 42.5 (4-73y). Twenty-seven patients were (54 %) male and 23 (46 %) were women. Three patients had other organ tumours, two patients had POEMS before CD diagnosis. Angioimmünoblastic T-cell lymphoma was developed in one patient after 7 years. Exposure to toxic substances was shown in one patient with eosinophilia. Two patients were positive for HHV-8 antibody. Monotypic lambda expression was observed in one patient. Twelve of the 15 patients who have admitted from different centers to our department were false diagnosed, pathologically. Conclusion: CD is an ignorable disease both clinically and pathologically because of nonspecific findings. We emphasized the importance of cooperation between clinician and the pathologist for correct diagnose and treatment of the patients. in the present study. Burkitt lymphoma in paediatric Sudanese patients: Sporadic type in endemic area I. Abdelhalim * , A. Humeida, A. Ismail * Alzaiem Alazhari University, Dept. of Pathology, Khartoum North, Sudan Objective: To study the pattern of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) and it's association with Epstein-Barr virus(EPV) among paediatric Sudanese patients. Method: Fifty-two children diagnosed with BL and referred to Radio-Isotope Centre Khartoum (RICK), were included in this study based on availability of pathology specimens and clinical records, following approval by RICK Ethical Committee. Histopathological diagnosis was performed according to 2008 WHO classification of neoplastic diseases of the haematopoietic lymphoid tissue following immunostaining of formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue blocks. The presence of EPV was investigated using EBV-LMP1 antibody on (FFPE). Results: BL represented 59 % of paediatric NHL seen in the period of this study. The mean age was 5.9 years (range 2-12). Male to female ratio was 1.8:1. The clinical pattern was mainly sporadic (85 %) while endemic type (15 %). None of cases was associated with immunodeficiency. The most common site of involvement was the gastrointestinal tract (70 %). EBV was detected in 33.4 % of cases. No significant correlation was observed between EBV positivity and disease pattern. Conclusion: Burkitt lymphoma is a common type of NHL among Sudanese children. Although Sudan is an African country with endemic malaria, BL has sporadic pattern with involvement of the gastrointestinal tract. Method: We retrospectively reviewed 42 cases of THRLBCL to evaluate its heterogenity based on morphologic, immunophenotypic, presentation features, and bone marrow infiltration. The cases retrieved from our pathology department were collected over a 10 year period from 2000 to 2015. The immunohistochemical panel already stained on archival sections incuded CD20, CD30, CD15, EMA, bcl-2, bcl-6, MUM1, and CD10. Results: The male to female ratio was 3.2 and the mean age at diagnosis was 52 years. At presentation, THRLBCL was nodal in 64.2 % (27 of 42) and involvement of bone marrow was observed in 16.6 % (7 of 42) of the patients. Three cases presented with micronodular splenic THRLBCL. Bone marrow infiltration was detected in 15.6 % (5 of 32) of patients in long term follow-up. On cases evaluated with Hans algorithm using the immunohistochemical panel including CD10, bcl-6 and MUM1, 35.7 % of the 14 cases were identified as germinal center origin. The present findings of this study suggest that on immunohistochemical examination of THRLBCL a large proportion of cases exhibit a diversity of morphologic and immunophenotypic features and molecular genetic studies on larger series are required to identify the heterogeneous nature of the entity. Conclusion: In our series, Burkitt-PTLD represents 4 cases of 50 PTLD. All cases received SOT and were late onset. All cases were EBV associated. After treatment, almost all patients had complete response. Phospho-histone-H3 (phH3) immunohistochemistry based mitotic index identifies histological grade in follicular lymphoma J. Bedekovics * , G. Irsai, K. Hegyi, L. Beke, L. Gergely, L. Krenacs, G. Mehes * University of Debrecen, Dept. of Pathology, Hungary Objective: Follicular lymphomas (FL) are categorized into three grades (G1-3) according to the number of centroblasts, however, it has low reproducibility affected by the sample quality. Phosphorylated histone H3 (phH3) was widely tested for the objective detection of mitotic figures in different malignancies. The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of phH3 in follicular lymphomas with different grades and to compare it with other proliferation parameters. Method: 48 FL cases and 9 control samples were examined. Hematoxylin-eosin based mitosis index (HE-MI), number of mitotic figures based on anti-phH3 immunohistochemical staining (phH3-MI) and percentage of Ki-67 positive cells (proliferation index, PI) were evaluated and compared with histological grade. Results: The phH3-MI value correlated significantly with the HE-MI (p < 0.0001) and the PI (p < 0.0001). All cell proliferation parameters showed significant correlation with the histological grade (HE-MI: p < 0.0001; phH3-MI: p < 0.0001, PI: p < 0.0001). The phH3-MI value was clearly distinctive between G2 and G1 FL groups (p < 0.0001) and was highly increased in G3 FL compared to G2 FL group (p = 0.0020). Conclusion: The phH3 IHC staining is a reliable tool for the identification of mitotic figures. Mitosis index evaluated by this method (phH3-MI) can be recommended as an additional parameter for the precise subcategorization of FL cases. Extranodal T/NK cell lymphoma: Method: It is a retrospective study of 9 cases of EN-NK/TCL retrieved from the Central Tunisian cancer registry department over a 15-yearperiod. Results: The sex ratio was of 8/1. The mean age was 48 years. The tumour was nasal and paranasal in 5 cases, the common symptom was nasal obstruction. For the 4 other cases, they were located in the palate, the submandibular gland, skin and in the soft tissues. It was a swelluing of the submandibular gland and of the ankle and a skin nodule. According to Ann_Arbor classification, the tumour was localized (stage I or II) in 6 cases and of advanced stage (III or IV) in 3 cases. At immunohistochemistry: CD3, CD56, Granzyme were positive respectively in 6 and 7 cases. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein1 was experessed in 3 cases. In-situ hybridization for Epstein Barr virus (EBV)-encoded RNA was positive 6cases. Adjuvant chemotherapy was indicated in 8 patients. It was associated to radiotherapy for 5 patients. Surgery was indicated for one patient. Complete remission was obtained in 4 cases. 3 patients had died and 2 were follow-up. Conclusion: EN-NK/TCL is uncommon in Tunisia. Its diagnosis is based on histological and immunophenotype characteristics and in-situ hybridization; the latter displaying the presence of EBV genome. and was statistically significant in MZL (p:0.02) and CLL (p:0.019) cases. Five FL cases (71,4 %) and 12 CLL/SLL cases (57,1 %) expressed Stathmin1 on paraimmunoblasts. IRTA1 expression in NMZL (p < 0.001) and ENMZL (p < 0.001) was statistically significant in monocytoid differentiation areas. Conclusion: None of these markers were found to be specific for any entity. With high expression profile of LEF1 for CLL/SLL, Stathmin1 for FL, IRTA1 for, ENMZL, NMZL especially with monocytoid differentiation, and MNDA for MZL could be used as secondary supporting markers for the cases with diagnostic difficulty. A rare case of Erdheim-Chester disease in a small population island E. Theofanous * , P. Paleomylitis * Nicosia General Hospital, Histopathology Dept., Cyprus Objective: Erdheim-Chester disease (ECD) is a rare, multisystem non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis. It was first described in 1930 by Jakob Erdheim and William Chester and ever since only several hundred cases has been documented in the literature. The disease is associated with significant morbidity, due to histiocytic infiltration of critical organ systems. Among the more common sites of involvement are the skeleton, central nervous system, cardiovascular system, lungs, kidney (retroperitoneum) and skin. Histologically, it is characterized by xanthogranulomatous infiltrates, which are positive for CD68 and negative for S100 and CD1a. Method: This case report describes a 44-year-old cypriot woman with a progressive course over 5 years. She was presented with obstructive uropathy and symmetrical sclerosis of long bones. Results: ECD was confirmed clinically, radiologically and histologically. Conclusion: Erdheim-Chester disease is a systemic histiocytosis caused by non-Langerhans cells and typically foamy histiocytes, involving mainly retroperitoneal space and bones. Recent data, has proved that most of these patients harbor point mutations of the BRAF gene at codon 600. Vemurafenib, a BRAF inhibitor, an oral FDA approved targeted agent to the BRAF protein for melanoma, shows dramatic activity in patients with Erdheim-Chester disease whose tumour contains the same mutation. This therapy has proven highly beneficial in this patient. Diagnosis of this rare syndrome requires a high index of suspicion and increased awareness. Renal intravascular large B-cell lymphoma W. Akpo * , N. Bennani * CHU IBN ROCHD, Pathology, Casablanca, Morocco Objective: Case report about renal intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (RILBCL) which is a rare type of extranodal lymphoma large B-cell. it is characterized by selective growth of lymphoma cells in the light not of large arteries and veins but of the capillaries particularly. Method: We report the case of a woman of 60 years with a medical background of treated tuberculosis. She was referred to the neurology department for some neurological symptoms. A Magnetic Resonance Imaging was performed and showed a vasculitis image. She was hospitalized for a probable vasculitis of the central nervous system. Concurrently she had anemia with kidney failure at 18 mg/l. Kidney biopsy was therefore executed. Histological analysis revealed, in the light of the glomerular and peritubular capillaries, centroblastic-like large atypical cells. The immunohistochemical study showed that the lymphoid cells expressed CD20, CD79a and did not express CD3. The final diagnosis was intravascular large B-cell lymphoma. Results: RILBCL is very rare. The age of the concerned population is between 35 and 85 years with a median age of 60 and a male / female ratio of 1: 1. Clinical symptoms of RILBCL may be those of proteinuria or renal dysfunction. Renal failure may be due to the circulation glomerular obstruction due to the invasion of lymphoma cells. Histopathology allows the diagnosis of RILBCL by highlighting lymphoma cells in the light of the glomerular and peritubular capillaries. RILBCL is an aggressive lymphoma with poor prognosis in general. However an early treatment provides better prognosis. Conclusion: RILBCL is a very rare large B cells lymphoma type with poor prognosis. However, the knowledge of this entity improves the patients'caring. Objective: Head and neck sarcomas are rare tumours with various histological types displaying different clinical behavior. Our objective is to summarize the epidemiology of sarcomas occurring in the head and neck and identify their clinicopathologic characteristics. Method: We performed a retrospective analysis of 50 patients with primary head and neck sarcomas diagnosed in our department from 1996 to 2013. Results: Thirty-eight adult cases and 12 pediatric cases were identified. The mean age was 31 years. Forty-two per cent of the patients were males and 58 % were females. Median duration of follow-up for the entire group was 18.5 months. The most common location was the nasal cavity (50 %). In adults, the most common histologic subtypes were fibrosarcoma (23.6 %), chondrosarcoma (13.5 %), Kaposi sarcoma (14.3 %) and osteosarcoma (14. 3 %). In the pediatric cohort, the most common histologic subtype was rhabdomyosarcoma (83 %). Fifteen per cent of patients had evidence of prior radiation exposure. The size of tumours was greater than 5 cm in 26.3 % of the cases and 35.5 % of tumours were high-grade. Margins were positive in 31.2 % of the cases. Lymph node metastasis were rare representing 6.5 %. Among all subtypes, 5-year overall survival was 66 % for adults and 73 % for pediatric patients. Conclusion: Sarcomas are uncommonly found in the head and neck. In our series, lesions tended to be high-grade with a significant portion of surgical specimens having positive margins. The role of PI3K/AKT pathway in cell proliferation and apoptosis in oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma A. Ribeiro-Silva * , A. Duarte, G. Silveira * Ribeirão Preto Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil Objective: The oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has high incidence worldwide, representing nearly 95 % of all oral malignancies. The PI3K/AKT pathway has already been studied in several cancers, but its role in OSCC in cell proliferation and apoptosis still merits further investigation. It is known that AKT phosphorylates the serine residue 136 of the proapoptotic protein BAD, leading to its inactivation. The XIAP inhibits apoptosis by binding to caspases 3, 7 to 9. The AKT phosphorylates the XIAP at serine residue 86, which leads to inhibition of XIAP degradation. This work aims to study the role of PI3K/AKT pathway in cell proliferation and apoptosis in OSCC. The cell line SCC25 of OSCC was chosen because it has constitutive activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway. These cells were treated with LY294002, which inhibits the activation of PI3K, and with the AKT IV, which inhibits the activation of AKT. Protein expression and immunolocalization analyzes for AKT, BAD and XIAP were performed by Western blotting and indirect immunofluorescence assays respectively in the presence of the inhibitors LY294002 or AKT IV. MTT assay was performed to analyze cell proliferation. Results: A decrease in cell survival was evident after the PI3K/AKT pathway blockage (PI3K or AKT), as well there was as a decrease in both AKT and BAD phosphorylation. Conclusion: Our data suggest that PI3K/AKT pathway may have an important role in cell proliferation and apoptosis in OSCC.  Histopathological and immunohistochemical studies of long term administration of nutmeg on parotid salivary glands in albino rats S. Saeid Abdelgayed * , M. EL-Sakhawy * Vet. Medical University Cairo, Dept. of Pathology, Giza, Egypt Objective: More understanding of the effect of long administration of Nutmeg in different doses on the histology and immunohistochemistry of the parotid salivary gland in male albino rats. Method: A total number of 60 adult male albino rats (average weight = 200 g) were classified into two main groups; Control group of 20 rats and received 1 ml of distilled water orally, and experimental group of 40 rats and was subdivided into 4 subgroups corresponding to 4 durations (2, 4, 6 and 8 weeks). Each subgroup in turn was further divided into 2 subgroups in which each rat was given 1 ml of the prepared nutmeg aqueous extract orally on a daily basis in the following doses (100 and 500 mg/kg body weight) respectively. By the end of the experiment, parotid salivary glands were obtained for histopathological, immunohistochemical, and image analysis. Results: Histopathological results revealed normal appearance of the control group. While the experimental group showed pathological changes gradually increased as the duration increased and as the dose administered increased. Immunohistochemical and image analysis results confirmed those recorded by histopathology. Conclusion: Administration of nutmeg had damaging and teratogenic effects on the parotid glands especially when taken at high doses and for long durations. Clinico-pathological patterns of salivary glandtumours among Sudanese patients S. Hamid * * Om Durman Islamic University, Dept. of Pathology, Khartoum, Sudan Objective: To identify the Clinico -pathological patterns of salivary gland tumours among Sudanese patients. Method: A cross-sectional study that involved patients submitted salivary gland biopsies to histopathology departments of four centers in Khartoum State, Sudan. Data were collected from patient's records and the slides were collected and reviewed to confirm the diagnosis. Results: Out of 110 patients aging 2 to 85 years with a mean of 35 ± 15, there were 62 (56.4 %) males. Fifty percent of the tumours originated from the parotid, 35.5 % from the Submandibular and 12.7 % from minor salivary glands. Of them 34 (30.9 %) were malignant and 76 (69.1 %) were benign. Eighty percent of patients with malignant lesions were below the age of 40. Pleomorphic adenoma was the most common benign tumour (86.8 %), followed by oxyphilic adenoma (5.3 %), and myoepithelioma (3.9 %). The malignant tumours were dominated by adenoid cystic carcinoma (26.5 %), mucoepidermoid carcinoma (23.5 %), acinic cell carcinoma (11.8 %), poorly differentiated carcinoma (11.8 %), papillary adenocarcinoma (5.9 %), basal cell carcinoma (5.9 %), squamous cell carcinoma (5.9 %), malignant myoepithelioma (2.9 %), polymorphous low grade carcinoma (2.9 %), and highly malignant large cell lymphoma (2.9 %). Conclusion: The pattern of distribution of salivary gland tumours in Sudanese patients share many pathological and epidemiological features with other developing countries. The results of our study demonstrate that FS in combination with clinical examination have an important role in the determination of the extent of thyroidectomy for patients with a thyroid nodule and FS is recommended for patients with noduler thyroid disease limited to one lobe of the thyroid gland and atypia/ follicular lesion of undetermined significance. There were 2 false positive FS results, and only one false negative results. The underdiagnosis was mainly due to the small size of the tumour. The 2 patients had false positive results included one patient with benign papillary hyperplasia as the final diagnosis and one patient with follicular adenoma. As a result, no patients underwent unnecessary total thyroidectomy. Objective: Snail and Twist are two key transcriptional regulators of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), whose expression has been studied in a few salivary gland tumours. The aim of this study was to investigate Snail and Twist expression in salivary adenocarcinoma, not otherwise specified (ANOS). Method: Nine cases of salivary ANOS were evaluated by immunohistochemistry using antibodies against Snail and Twist. The association between Snail or Twist expression and clinicopathological parameters was analyzed statistically using Fisher's exact test. Results: The mean age of nine salivary ANOS patients was 52.6 years (range, 35-76 years) with a predilection for male (male-to-female ratio, 2:1). Four cases (44.4 %) occurred in the parotid gland and five cases (55.6 %) involved the minor salivary glands. Five cases (55.6 %) showed regional or distant metastasis, and two cases (22.2 %) showed recurrence. Snail was positive in about half of the cases (4/9, 44.4 %), whereas Twist expression was observed in most cases (8/9, 88.9 %). Snail expression was significantly associated with regional and distant metastasis (P = 0.048). Twist expression showed no correlation with clinicopathological parameters. Conclusion: Our results suggest that Snail and Twist are involved in EMT of salivary ANOS. Snail may play an important role in metastasis of salivary ANOS. Conclusion: Non-KC is a rare neoplasm with distinct morphological characteristics. Its diagnosis is primarily based on the site of lesions and the histological features. The diagnosis and differential diagnosis could be aided by immunohistochemical staining. The tumour may originate from the epithelium of nasal cavity and sinus, and was not closely related with EB virus and HPV infection; the treatment is primarily surgical excision combined with postoperative radiotherapy. Objective: Laryngeal amyloidosis (LA) is a rare lesion (first reported 1873) representing 0,5-1 % of all benign laryngeal diseases. Although usually primary and localized it can also be a part of systemic disease or secondary to an underlying malignancy. The precise etiology and pathogenesis of LA remain unknown. There is no definite established link with smoking,alcohol or vocal abuse. Method: A 67 years old heavy smoker woman was presented with a 6 months history of hoarseness and recent onset of a choking sensation. Laryngoscopy revealed an 1,8 cm lobulate ventricle and left vocal cord mass suggesting a laryngeal malignancy. An incisional biopsy consisting of 0,5 × 0,5 × 0,3 cm tissue was performed. Results: Microscopically showed subepithelial globular depositions of amorphous,acellular eosiniphilic material or bundles of eosinophilic tissue with variable inflammatory reaction including lymphocytes and plasma cells. Foreing-body giant cells were also noted. Congo red staining under polarized light revealed yellow-green birefringence consistent with amyloidosis. There was no evidence of monoclonality in the plasma cells and amyloid by immunohistochemistry(CD138 k,λ). No signs of malignancy were seen. Further work up for systemic amyloidosis was negative. An endoscopic excision was done. Conclusion: LA is a rare,usually localized lesion. Laryngoscopy may falsely suggests a malignancy. Definitive diagnosis is always established histologically. Long term follow-up is indicated for easy detection of recurrence or subsequent systemic disease development. Clinico-pathological characteristics and prognosis of primary nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma: A report of 73 cases Method: The data from consecutive patients with NPAC from 1999 January to July 2010 in institute were retrospectively analyzed. Results: Seventy-three patients with NPAC were included in this study, with 25 % (18/73) stage 1, 26 % (19/73) stage 2, 22 % (16/73) stage 3, and 27 % (20/73) stage 4. Histopathologically, 73 % of NPAC were salivary gland type (53/73) and 27 % were common type (20/73). Significant differences were observed in 5 year OS and DFS rates between patients with and without CT /MRI-detected cranial nerve involvement (73.7 vs. 25.6 %, p = 0.001; 56.6 vs. 19.3 %, p = 0.002). In 19 patients with early stage disease (stage I-II), significant differences were observed between the surgery group and non-surgery group in both 5 year OS and DFS rates (P = 0.031, 0.012, respectively). No statistically significant differences were found in 5-year OS and DFS rates between different pathological types of adenocarcinoma. Conclusion: Primary NPAC is a distinct entity and an uncommon type in nasopharyngeal tumour and it mainly presents with salivary gland type adenocarcinoma. Cranial nerve involvement is the factors affecting the prognosis of the patients. The surgical treatment can improve the prognosis of NPAC patients in early stage. Pituitary endocrine tumours presenting as sinonasal or nasopharyngeal masses: A case series illustrating potential diagnostic pitfalls M. Hyrcza * , O. Mete, S. Ezzat, S. Asa Objective: Retrospective survey of invasive pituitary endocrine tumours presenting as sinonasal or nasopharyngeal masses. Method: We identified 13 non-ectopic pituitary endocrine tumours presenting as masses of the nasal cavity, sinuses, or nasopharynx, which were biopsied from these sites. Results: The series included 5 men and 8 women, aged 29 to 69 years. Presentations included nasal obstruction (4), headaches (3), visual defects (3), epistaxis (1), rhinorrhea (1), sepsis (1), and fatigue (1). All tumours originated from the sella and extended inferiorly to involve the sphenoid sinus (10), ethmoid air cells (8), nasal cavity (6), and nasopharynx (3). In three cases the initial diagnosis was incorrect; two were classified as olfactory neuroblastoma, one of those was converted to neuroendocrine carcinoma, and one tumour was initially diagnosed as neuroendocrine carcinoma. In two cases, the wrong diagnosis led to incorrect treatment. Follow-up was available for 10 patients and ranged from 2 to 25 years. Four patients were free of disease and 6 were alive with disease. Conclusion: Pituitary endocrine tumours can invade sinonasal cavities and/or nasopharynx and when they do, they present a possible diagnostic pitfall with potentially serious consequences. Pituitary endocrine tumours should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a neuroendocrine nasopharyngeal or sinonasal tumour. In remainder no thyroid malignancies were diagnosed at 6 month follow-up. "Bethesda" categories show the following LRs, (95%CI): "Malignant" 91.4 (12.8-650); 79-98 % cancer probability "Suspicious for malignancy" 9.9 (9.9 (3-33); 29-86 % probability. "Suspicious for follicular neoplasm" 0.51 (0.3-0.97), 26-27 % probability. "Atypia of unknown significance" 0.56 (0.4-0.9); 2-26 % probability. "Benign" 0.06 (0.02-0.2); 1-4 % probability, and "Unsatisfactory" 0.24 (0.06-1.1); 1-13 % cancer probability . Conclusion: LRs greater than 10 and Less than 0.1 are helpful in ruling in and ruling out of thyroid malignancies; LRs 0.1 to less than 1, and greater tham 1 to 10 are less accurate and of limited diagnostic accuracy. Due to uncertainly of several "Bethesda" categories highlighted by the LRs, the surgeries continue to be performed for patients with a substantial number of benign lesions. Palatal mucoepidermoid carcinoma with acral cutaneous metastasis at presentation S. Abdullahi * , A. Liman, G. Waziri, K. Balarabe, D. Sulaiman It is the most common primary salivary gland malignancy in both adults and children. More than 50 % of cases affect major salivary glands however, affectation of minor glands in the palate is not uncommon. Palatal tumours may extend into the upper respiratory tract and skull while distant metastases via lymphatic and haematogenous routes though uncommon, is to the lungs, liver, brain and bones. Metastatic disease at diagnosis is observed in less than 5 % of the cases. Cutaneous metastases though rare, have been reported in the past but we believe this is the first case of acral cutaneous metastatic mucoepidermoid carcinoma at the time of diagnosis of the primary palatal lesion. Method: Patient: The patient is a 39 year old woman who presented with soft palatal swelling and an ulcerated swelling at the distal end of the left index finger. Clinicopathological correlation was key to arriving at diagnosis. Conclusion: Metastatic mucoepidermoid carcinoma therefore should be one of the differential diagnosis of numerous primary cutaneous carcinomas and adenocarcinomas especially those producing mucin. Objective: Despite the high morbidity and mortality of head and neck carcinomas, there is limited data on the epidemiological and morphological patterns in our environment. This study is aimed at determination of epidemiological and histopathological patterns of carcinomas of head and neck region in Zaria, Nigeria. Method: This is a 5 year retrospective study. Data were extracted from the cancer registry and archived histopathology request cards. The slides were reviewed and the data was analysed using Microsoft Excel. Results: A total of 154 cases were studied, comprising 106 males and 48 females, the M:F ratio was 2.2:1, the mean age was 46.86 years with peak in fifth decade. The commonest sites were nasopharynx, oral cavity and major salivary glands contributing 30.5, 24.1 and 17.5 % respectively. Of the nasopharyngeal carcinomas, 85.1 % were undifferentiated type. Sixty cases were squamous cell carcinoma, with 35.0, 31.7 and 23.3 % from oral cavity, sino-nasal tract and larynx respectively. Oropharyngeal carcinoma was uncommon. Adenoid cystic carcinoma, mainly from the parotid and minor glands was commonest salivary gland-type carcinoma. Conclusion: Squamous cell carcinoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma, which have strong links with tobacco and EBV infections respectively, were common. Further studies are recommended to analyse the possible risks factors. Objective: Primary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma arises within the jaws is a type of odontogenic carcinoma that is extremely rare. These tumours have no interaction with oral mucosa so they may develop from the odontogenic epithelium residues or from a benign odontogenic cyst or tumour epithelium. Method: Here we present two cases of intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma arising from keratocystic odontogenic tumour. Keratocystic odontogenic tumour can be locally aggressive and have a high recurrence rate despite the benign characteristics of odontogenic epithelium. Results: Twenty-nine years old patient had two recurrences of maxillary keratocystic odontogenic tumour which eventually transformed into malignant tumour. Second patient was 56-years old who had keratocystic odontogenic tumour on his maxilla and had malignant transformation at the time of diagnosis. Conclusion: The presented cases were discussed from all aspects of clinical history, radiological examination and pathological features. The patients mentioned gradual vision loss over the period of 2 months to 3 years along with eye pain. Men were prevalent in the age group from 51 to 60 years old, while majority of women developed this condition in the age group from 61 to 70. Results: predominant localization of the tumour on the optic nerve (34 cases) and pre-equatorial region (28 cases). The most tumours were of mixed cell type (48 cases) and spindle cell type (20 cases). Conclusion: In all cases tumours were diagnosed at the late stage; the most tumours were of mixed and spindle cell type; the ratio of women to men was 1.6 to 1; the most often localization was in the optic nerve and pre-equatorial region. Thyroid-like low grade nasopharyngeal papillary adenocarcinoma: A case report H. Seneldir * , G. Kir, C. S. Topal, M. I. Tosun * Istanbul, Turkey Objective: Thyroid-like low grade nasopharyngeal papillary adenocarcinoma (TL-LGNPPA) is an extremely rare neoplasm characterized by morphological analogy to papillary thyroid carcinoma and abnormal expression of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). Method: A 25 years old female patient was admitted to our Ear, Nose and Throat out-patient clinic with the complaint of nasal obstruction for 1 year. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a 23 × 20 × 19 mm sized polypoid mass on the roof of the nasopharynx and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in bilateral neck region. Thyroid gland was normal and an endoscopic punch biopsy was performed. Results: Histologically, the tumour consisted of papillary growth of cuboidal or columnar epithelium. The papilla were complex and tightly packed with hyalinized fibrovascular cores. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive for TTF-1, negative for thyroglobulin, CK19, CD56, P63, Napsin A. The pathological diagnosis was consistent with TL-LGNPPA. Conclusion: TL-LGNPPA is a rare low-grade neoplasm with distinct morphological characteristics. The differential diagnoses included papillary thyroid carcinoma, low-grade papillary adenocarcinoma of salivary gland origin, and a papillary variant of intestinal -type adenocarcinoma. TL-LGNPPA have an excellent prognosis with simple and complete resection. Objective: Squamous cell carcinoma of oral cavity is in the ten most common cancer worldwide. Oral epithelial dysplasia may be described as morphological appearances between normal and malignant epithelial tissue. Here, we evaluated the mRNA expression of caspase-4 and immunohistochemical detection of apoptotic and proliferating cells via DDF-45, and Ki67 antibodies, on oral squamous cell carcinoma, dysplasia, and non-neoplastic epithelial hyperplasia cases intending to emphasize the apoptosis in oral cancer and in the disease's so called early stages. Method: Ten formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissues were used for each entity. Caspase 4 expression was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR. ABC method was used for immunohistochemistry. Results: Reduced caspase-4 expression was seen in 80, 73, and 54 % in cancer, dysplasia, and hyperplasia samples, respectively. Immunohistochemical analysis of cancer samples from dysplasia revealed high DDF45 immunoreactivity, whereas low immunoreactivity from hyperplasia group. Proliferation index also was higher in cancer cases than dysplasia and hyperplasia. Conclusion: DFF45 seems to play an important role in the onset of apoptotic process by acting through the regulation of DNA fragmentation. These data suggest that the apoptosis through caspase 3 expression and DNA fragmentation is active in oral epithelial neoplasms especially in squamous cell carcinoma. Method: Twenty cases of PA, 20 of RPA and four TRPA cases were immunohistochemistry studied for ER and PR. A grading system based on nuclear reactivity percentage was assigned on a scale from 0 to 3. Less than 10 % cell reactivity was assigned 0; 11-25 % was assigned 1; 26-50 % was assigned 2; and reactivity greater than 50 % was assigned 3. CT imaging and FNB revealed metastatic disease in lymph nodes of the mediastinum, however no primary tumour was found in our patient. The expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stem cell markers in oral dysplasia and cancer S. E. Gultekin * , O. Ozer Yucel, B. Senguven, L. Arslan * Gazi University Dental Faculty, Dept. of Oral Pathology, Ankara, Turkey Objective: The aim of the study is to analyse the expression of epithelialmesenschymal transition and cancer stem cell markers in oral epithelial dysplasia and oral squamous cell carcinoma in order to asses their influence on oral carcinogenesis. Method: The study was conducted on 45 formalin fixed, parraffinembedded tissue samples consisting of oral squamous cell carcinoma (n:15), epithelial dysplasia (n: 15) and epithelial hyperplasia (n: 15) . The expression of Snail 1 and CD 133-prom 1 was detected by using both quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, whereas CD 44 and E-cadherin expression was evaluated immunohistochemically. Results: The overall Snail 1 up-regulation was seen 56 % of the cases (25 out of 45) where as, prom 1 up-regulation was found 7 % (3 out of 45) which were in the samples from 1 carcinoma and 2 hyperplasia. Elavated mRNA level for Snail 1 was significant in carcinoma cases (p < 0.05). The decrease in E-cadherin expression and increase in CD 133 expression was found in the spectrum of oral epithelial hyperplasia to squamous cell carcinoma . Conclusion: Snail 1 may indicate the potential role as an epithelialmesenchynal transition marker in the sequence from oral hyperplasia to dysplasia-cancer. Clinico-pathological significance of immunohistochemical biomarkers in salivary duct carcinomas: A multi-institutional study of 152 cases T. Nagao * , Y. Tada Objective: To investigate the frequency and significance of neuroendocrine differentiation in mucosal malignant melanomas of sinonasal and oral regions. Method: Thirteen cases of oral and sinonasal mucosal malignant melanoma were retrieved from our archieves. Ten cases who had available blocks were included to the study. Prior diagnoses were confirmed reevaluating hematoxylin and eosin stained slides and immunohistochemical stains by two pathologists. Synaptophysin, chromogranin and CD56 expressions were investigated by immunohistochemistry from paraffin-embedded tissues in ten cases of mucosal malignant melanomas. Cases were evaluated with respect to both staining percentage and intensity. Results: Study cases were epithelioid (6/10), epithelioid and spindle cell (3/10) and plasmacytoid (1/10) morphology. Five cases (50 %) were stained moderately and one case (10 %) stained weakly for CD56. Synaptophysin positivity was observed in 3 cases, focally and in mild to moderate intensity. All cases were negative for chromogranin. Conclusion: Our findings suggested that neuroendocrine differentiation in mucosal malignant melanomas is not uncommon finding. The awareness of this feature and to apply a broad panel of immunohistochemistry are necessary for distinction of mucosal malignant melanomas from histologically similar malignant tumours. Objective: Investigation of morphological differences in relation with serological variables between primary versus secondary Sjogren's syndrome associated with systemic scleroderma (Scl-SS). Method: A total of 69 primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) and Scl-SS patients were grouped according to the the AECG criteria as pSS and Scl-SS. Hematoxylin and eosin sections of the minor salivary gland biopsy were re-evaluated and the lymphocyte focus score (FS), plasma cell focus (PCF) and fibrosis rates were all evaluated. Results: There were 43 pSS and 26 Scl-SS cases. Both biopsy and autoantibody were positive in 16 pSS cases while only biopsy was positive in 25 cases and only antibody in 1 case. Both biopsy and antibody were positive in 5 Scl-SS cases while only biopsy was positive in 18 and only antibody in 3 cases. The PCF was identified in 24 pSS cases while 5 Scl-SS cases. The PCF was statistically significantly higher in pSS cases (p = 0.003). No difference was seen between SS subtypes in terms of lymphocyte FS, fibrosis and auto-antibody positivity. Conclusion: We found that PCFes could be found more frequently in pSS than Scl-SS. Additionally our study reveals that the co-existence of Scl-SS decreases the incidence of FS value ≥1 compared to pSS. Objective: Granular cell tumour is an uncommon neoplasm of soft tissue that can arise in multiple corporal sites, but is mainly met in the skin, oral cavity or digestive tract. We report seven patients with granular cell tumour in the oral cavity (four), the skin (two) and the breast (one). Three of the patients were men and three women and their age ranged from 15 to 42 years. Method: In all cases an excisional biopsy of the neoplasm with safety margins was performed. Tumour sizes ranged between 0,5 and 2,3 cm. All the tumours were processed for histopathological and immunohistochemical study. Results: The tumours were constituted by a poorly circumscribed proliferation of polygonal cells with central relatively small nucleus and a pronounced eosinophilic and granular cytoplasm. Two cases with spindle-cell morphology and prominent nucleoli, were characterized as "atypical". All tumour cells were positive for S-100 and CD68 and negative for Actin. No recurrence is reported, due to safe resection margins. Conclusion: The origin of the granular cells is controversial. Granular cell tumours are benign and malignant cases are rare. Some granular cell tumours are called "atypical" in the presence of one or two histological criteria, established by AFIP. PS-12-038 TERT promoter mutations in laryngeal squamous cell carcinomas I. Yilmaz * , B. E. Erkul, S. Ozturk Sari, G. Narli, Z. Kucukodaci, S. Yildirim * Gata Heh, Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey Objective: Mutations in the promoter region of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) have been identified in over 50 cancer types, including many associated with ultraviolet (UV) exposure and having low rates of self-renewal cells. The high frequency of TERT mutations in cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) have been revealed in many studies, but the data about laryngeal SCC is limited. Method: In this study a total of 78 laryngeal SCC tissues were obtained, genomic DNA's were isolated from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumour tissue samples and TERT promoter region (the positions of C228T and C250T) mutations were analyzed by PCR-based direct sequencing method. Results: TERT promoter mutations were detected in only 4 of 78 cases (5.1 %). Somatic C228T and C250T mutations was demonstrated in 3 and 1 cases, respectively. 4 patients were heavy smokers, 3 cases were stage 1 and one case was stage 3 laryngeal SCC. Only one of them had a recurrence. We did not find any statistically significant clinicopathological features in laryngeal SCC with TERT mutations. In conclusion, our results demonstrated that TERT promoter mutation in laryngeal SCC is uncommon. This finding was consistent with the role of UV in cutaneous SCC pathogenesis and we did not find any association with prognosis. Objective: Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour (IMT) is a rare and usually benign soft tissue lesion that mainly occurs in the lung and abdominopelvic region of children and young adults. The most common sites of extrapulmonary IMT are the mesentery and omentum. The IMT also known as plasma cell granuloma or inflammatory pseudotumour. Method: The surgical specimens were formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded. The section were stained with routinary H&E. Immunohistochemistry was performed. Results: A 52-year-old woman had a history of breast cancer. After the breast surgery computed tomography showed a solitary mass measuring approximately 12 × 10 mm in the proximal tracheal lumen. The resected tumour appears tan-yellow. Microscopic examination revealed a mixture of spindle cells showing fibroblastic and myofibroblastic differentiation. Admixed with the spindle cell proliferation was an inflammatory infiltrate containing lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear leukocytes and plasma cells. Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells stain strongly for vimentin, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and focally for muscle specific actin. The tumour had a low Ki-67 proliferative index. We diagnosed this case as IMT. ALK positivity can be helpful in the differential diagnosis of these neoplasms. Objective: To present an unusual case of dentin dysplasia type 1 (DTDP-1) undergoing an orthognathic surgery. Method: Using a retrospective study design, we analysed the clinical chart and radiographs of an orthognathic patient with DTDP-1. Results: A 34-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our department for combined orthodontics-orthognathic surgery-prosthodontic treatments. On the initial examination, the patient presented with skeletal class III and edentulous area of the left posterior maxilla. Radiographically, most of the teeth, despite clinically asymptomatic, had short roots. The patient has lost several teeth over the past decade. The diagnosis of DTDP-1 was diagnosed based on the radiographic and history findings. Other family members are free from the disease. Conclusion: DTDP-1 (OMIM: #125400) is a rare autosomal-dominant form of DTDP and seriously affects dental root development. The patients often have severe tooth mobility, spontaneous early tooth loss, abnormal tooth spacing or malocclusion. Genetic studies and counselling are required because of the familial nature of the disease. Various preventive dental measures is necessary to prevent pulpal/periapical infections and early tooth loss. The careless orthodontics-orthognathic surgery may accelerate the early tooth exfoliation. We also review and discuss clinical, genetic, pathological and therapeutic aspects of this disease. Next Generation Sequencing analysis of ameloblastomas S. E. Gultekin * , R. Aziz, B. Senguven, C. Heydt, R. Buettner * Gazi University Dental Faculty, Dept. of Oral Pathology, Ankara, Turkey Objective: Ameloblastomas are benign odontogenic tumours of the jaws that exhibit aggressive biological behaviour with local recurrence. There are various types of this tumour and confusion still exists among clinicians as to its correct classification. A comprehensive molecular prolifing of ameloblastomas was performed to identify novel genomic alterations that will led to recognation of molecular subtypes and influance the new therapeutic approaches. Method: In this study, a total of 60 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded ameloblastoma samples were sequenced using the Ion Torrent PGM and the 30 gene AmpliSeq Library Kit from 10 ng of extracted DNA. Histological subtyping for ameloblastomas was done on hematoxylineosin sections. Results: Next generation sequencing analysis showed that BRAF and PTEN were the most frequent altered genes in all subtypes of the ameloblastomas. Solid/multicystic ameloblastomas displayed remarkable gene mutation compared to unicystic type. There was not any gene alteration in respect to histologic subtypes of the tumour. Conclusion: This is the first comprehensive genomic analysis of ameloblastomas that will shed new light on fundamental aspects in understanding the molecular pathogenesis of odontogenic tumours and may help in the development of new targeted therapies. Objective: The potential role of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) molecules in the tumourogenesis of odontogenic lesions has not been investigated in detail. Here we aimed to evaluate Twist, Snail, Integrin β-1 and E-cadherin expression in ameloblastoma (ABL), keratocystic odontogenic tumour (KOT), orthokeratinized odontogenic keratocyst (OOKK) and dental follicle (DF). Method: Twist, snail, integrinβ-1 and E-cadherin expression were examined immunohistochemically and expression of these factors have been scored on the basis of staining intensity and ratio of positive cells. Results: Mean expression scores of all four markers were highest in DF. There weren't any statistically significant difference in expression scores of snail and twist for the groups however E-cadherin and integrinβ-1 expression values of DF were statistically significant. E-cadherin expression was also significantly higher in OOKK in comparison to KOT and ABL. For solid and unicystic ABL we didn't observe any statistical significance in expression scores of markers. Conclusion: Higher twist and snail expression in DF may point out to role of these factors in odontogenesis rather than odontogenic tumour pathogenesis. Significant loss of E-cadherin and integrin β-1 expression in ABL and KOT may facilitate loss of adhesion between tumour cells and could be associated with tumour invasiveness and progression. Factors that may influence polymorphous low-grade adenocarcino- Objective: There is mounting evidence highlighting the importance of some biological processes in tumour growth, such as vascular supply, apoptosis, autophagy and senescence. We have investigated such scenarios in Polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA) in an attempt to identify those that are relevant for this particular lesion. Method: We analyzed 31 cases of PLGA using immunohistochemistry for anti-CD34 and anti-CD105 to detect blood vessels; anti-D2-40 to detect lymphatic vessels; anti-Bax, anti-Bcl-2 and anti-Survivin to explore cell apoptosis; anti-Beclin and anti-LCB3 to investigate autophagy and anti-p21 and anti-p16 for senescence. Results: Immunohistochemical results showed that PLGA containing numerous CD34-positive blood vessels, very low number of CD105 positive cells and scarce lymphatic vessels. Bcl2 was strongly and uniformly expressed whereas Bax expression was weaker and heterogeneous often within the same lesion. Survivin, Beclin and LC3B were strongly expressed in PLGA cells. Regarding senescence, the results showed that PLGA cells do not express p21 and only a small proportion of lesions show positivity to p16. Conclusion: PLGA progression does not depend on newly formed vessels, it is otherwise promoted by autophagy, sustained by both antiapoptotic and anti-senescence signals and stimulated by Bcl-2 and Survivin. Objective: Castleman disease (CD) is a rare benign lymphoproliferative disorder of unknown etiology, typically presenting as a solitary mediastinal mass. The head and neck region is the second most common site; however, the salivary glands are rarely affected. Two clinical (localised and generalised) and three histopathological (hyaline vascular, plasma cell, and mixed) types have been described. We present a case of a 59-year-old male patient with parotid CD of the mixed type as a rare entity. A 59 year old man presented to our otorhinolaryngology clinic complaining of tinnitus. The patient underwent a left superficial parotidectomy with a clinical prediagnosis of mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Results: H&E stained sections showed mostly preserved lymph node architecture. Some lymphoid follicles had atrophic germinal centers and mantle zones was expanded with the cells somewhat aligned concentrically. Also there were sclerotic blood vessels radially penetrated the germinal centers, the overall appearance of the follicle may resemble a lollipop. The diagnosis rendered was CD, mixed type. Conclusion: The wide spectrum of clinical manifestations makes the diagnosis a challenge. It is diagnosed by exclusion with the aid of histopathological examination. Therefore, it is important that physicians consider this clinical entity so patients can receive adequate and early treatment. Objective: The aim of the present study was the analyses of BRAF V600E(VE1) protein expression and BRAF mutation status in codon 600 in salivary gland cancers. Method: For identification of BRAF V600E(VE1) protein, the immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was performed on the TMA salivary gland tissue sections derived from 95 patients. Furthermore, the automatic PCR-based diagnostic platform was enriched for the evaluation of mutations in codon 600 of BRAF gene. Results: By IHC cytoplasmic BRAF V600E(VE1) protein expression was found in 2/95 cases: respectively, 1/3 (33 %) case of adenocarcinoma, and 1/5 (20 %) case of carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma. The nonspecific nuclear BRAF V600E(VE1) protein expression was evaluated in 14 (15 %) cases of all analyzed samples. In this group there were 9/28 (32 %) cases of pleomorphic adenoma, 3/5 (60 %) cases of ductal carcinoma, 1/9 (11 %) cases of mucoepidermal carcinoma, and 1/5 (20 %) case of carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma. All analyzed cases were negative for PCR-based analyzes of BRAF V600 mutations. Conclusion: In heterogeneous group of salivary gland cancers further molecular analyses are necessary for better understanding the role of genetic alterations. We have found an peculiar BRAF V600E protein expression which was not confirmed by molecular tests. The inorganic pyrophosphatase (PPA1) Objective: Is PPA1 correlated with unfavorable outcome in head and neck cancers. Method: Combining the 2D electrophoresis and mass spectrometry performed on three groups of LSCC cell lines, derived from primary tumours, recurrent tumours and metastases, were used for identifying the potential biomarker candidates of relapse and metastasis in LSCC. Furthermore, the immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis were performed for evaluation of selected protein expression and localization in primary LSCC N(0), N(+) and SCC metastases in lymph nodes. Results: Annexin V, calreticulin and the PPA1 were identified exclusively for significant upregulation in the metastases-derived cell lines. Furthermore, using IHC these selected upregulated proteins were compared according their abundance in primary LSCC N(0), LSCC N(+), and in LSCC metastases in lymph nodes. Our results show a positive correlation between the PPA1 protein expression and the presence of lymph node metastasis (p < 0.001). For the other two proteins, there was no statistically significant correlation. Conclusion: The PPA1 protein could become potentially novel biomarker of metastasis in LSCC. Revealed group of proteins are deregulated in recurrences and metastases of LSCC, and might be useful biomarkers identified in molecular background of LSCC. Objective: Endolymphatic sac tumour (ELST) is a rare neoplasm with benign histopathological appearance and clinically destructive behavior which occurs in the skull base and frequently invades the petrous bone, the mastoid, semicircular canal, cerebellopontine angle structures and cranial nerve. The term "aggressive papillary middle ear tumour" has been proposed to describe this invasive type of middle ear tumour. These tumours can be encountered sporadically or in Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease. Method: Here we report a sporadic case of ELST in 54-year-old woman. There wasn't any symptoms or history of VHL disease in the patient. She presented with a chief complaints of vertigo and hearing loss approximately 15 year duration. CT imaging demonstrated a destructive lesion of the right petrous bone. MR scanning revealed a 6 × 7.5 mm mass which showed peripheral hyperintensity and central hypointensity on T1-and T2-weighted images. Microscopically the tumour was composed of typical papillary structures lined by a single layer of cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells The stroma of the papillary fronds was richly vascularized. The epithelial cells had uniform nuclei and pale eosinophilic to clear cytoplasm. Immunohistochemically the tumour cells showed positive reactivity with pan-CK, CK7, EMA, vimentin, and focal reactivity with glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and p53. Objective: Higher PD-L1 expression in tumour cells predicts better response rate in NSCLC patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Small biopsies are predominant specimen type available for predictive testing. We analyzed PD-L1 expression in various biopsy size specimens of NSCLC tumours. Method: The study included resection specimens (N = 63), tissue microarrays prepared from resected tumours (n = 50), and small biopsies obtained during diagnostic procedures (N = 64). FFPE sections were prepared for immunohistochemistry using PD-L1 rabbit monoclonal antibody (clone SP142, Roche, USA) on an automated staining platform (Benchmark ultra, Roche, USA). PD-L1 expression was evaluated on tumour cells with membranous staining. PD-L1 positivity was defined by two cutoff values, 1 and 5 %. Results: There were 48 % positive cases among resection specimens at 1 % cutoff value, and 38 % at 5 % cutoff value. For tissue microarrays, we obtained 12 and 8 % positivity, at 1 and 5 % cutoff values. For small biopsies, the positivity rate was 16 and 14 %, at 1 and 5 % cutoff values. Higher PD-L1 expression was observed in SCC. Taking 1 % cutoff value, SCC positivity rate was 71 % in resection specimens, 11 % in tissue microarrays, and 16 % in small biopsies. Conclusion: We conclude that size of biopsy has major impact on PD-L1 tumour positivity most probably due to heterogeneous expression. Role of the stem cell niche of respiratory acini in lung tissue remodeling in idiopathic interstitial pneumonia and pulmonary sarcoidosis E. Kogan * , S. Demoura, U. Kirillov * Setchenov Moscow Med. University, Dept. of Anatomic Pathology, Russia Objective: to study morphology and molecular mechanisms of lung tissue remodeling in stem cell niche of respiratory acini (SCN) in different idiopathic intersticial pneumonia (IIP) and sarcoidosis (S). Method: Biopsies from 252 patients with IIP and SL were. There were patients with interstitial lung fibroses-118 cases (47 %), nonspecific interstitial pneumonia-35 cases (14 %) , desquamated interstitial pneumonia-23 cases (9 %), cryptogenic interstitial pneumonia-18 cases (7 %). S was without and with prominent fibrosis-43 cases (17 % Objective: The aim of our work was to search for morphological and immunohistochemical (PD-L1) prognostic factors of 116 MPM. Method: We performed a retrospective study on 116 MPM diagnosed at our institution from 1993 to 2015. The following histopathological data were collected: the presence of necrosis, nuclear atypia, nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio, the aspect of chromatin, the size of nucleoli and Furhman grade, mitotic count and the presence of an intra-tumoural lymphocytic infiltration. Immunohistochemical expression of PD-L1 was also studied. Results: As expected, sarcomatoid, biphasic or desmoplastic subtypes were associated with a poorer prognosis (p = 0.0006). Regardless histopathologic subtype, the presence of necrosis (p = 0.0336), nuclear atypia (p = 0.0002), mitotic count ≥3 (p < 0.0001), presence of atypical mitosis (p = 0.0003), nucleoli ≥3 μm (p = 0.0001) and Furhman grade >1 (p = 0.0485) were associated with a poorer prognosis. Within epithelioid subtype all these factors were significantly related to prognosis. Within sarcomatoid, biphasic and desmoplastic MPM only atypical mitosis was significanly related to prognosis. PD-L1 (E1L3N) expression was significantly associated with a poorer prognosis in epithelioid MPM (p = 0.0441). PD-L1 expression was higher in sarcomatoid MPM. Objective: Glycine Decarboxylase (GLDC) is a critical enzyme of tumour-initiating cells (TIC), which have a stem cell phenotype and are held responsible for increased tumourigenicity, therapy resistance and recurrent disease. GLDC is furthermore important in metabolism under hypoxic conditions. Because conflicting results were published concerning the prognostic significance of TIC cell surface markers in lung cancer, our aim was to study the immunohistochemical expression and prognostic significance of GLDC and HIF-1α in a large homogeneous cohort of stage I/II NSCLC. Method: Immunohistochemistry for GLDC and HIF-1α was validated on two NSCLC cell lines (A549, NCI-H460), evaluated in 428 patients on a tissue microarray with 466 NSCLC, and compared with clinicopathological parameters. Results: High-GLDC was detected in 33/428 cases (7.7 %), HIF-1α was expressed in 71 (16.6 %) cases-more frequently in SqCC (p < 0.001). GLDC and HIF-1α were significantly associated with worse tumour related survival (p = 0.013, p = 0.021). Patients with low-GLDC/negative HIF-1α showed a significantly longer survival (p = 0.013, p = 0.002), likewise younger patients (p = 0.007), patients with non-large cell carcinoma histology (p = 0.006), and lower pT-category/UICC-stage (p = 0.002/p = 0.001). In multivariate analysis, UICC-stage, age and combinatory GLDC/HIF-1α expression were independent prognostic factors. Conclusion: Low-GLDC expression without expression of hypoxia markers is a favorable prognostic marker in early stage NSCLC. Objective: Adenocarcinoma is the most common histologic type of nonsmall cell lung carcinomas. The existence of lung cancer stem cells (CSCs) and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human tissue is controversy. The aim of this study is to investigate the expression and clinical significance of CSCs and EMT markers and evaluate the correlation between the two in lung adenocarcinoma. Method: A total of 97 cases comprise the tissue microarray from surgical resection for primary lung adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry for ALDH1 and CD44 as CSC markers and E-cadherin, vimentin, fibronectin, SMA as EMT markers was performed. Results: High ALDH1A1 expression was statistically associated with female gender (p = 0.001), smoker (p = 0.012), and high pT stages (p = 0.046). High CD44 expression was statistically associated with female gender (p = 0.008), non-smoker (p = 0.000), and no pleural invasion (p = 0.039). High expression of ALDH1 was associated with good overall survival (p = 0.021). High expression of CD44 was correlated with both good overall survival (p = 0.024) and disease-free survival (p = 0.000). Vimentin expression was associated with pT stage (p = 0.001) and pleural invasion (p = 0.028). CSC markers expression was not related to EMT. Our results showed that the expression of CSCs was associated with a good prognosis in lung adenocarcinoma. The prognostic significance of EMT markers was skeptical in this study. There is a need for more research about CSC, EMT, and the relation between these two in human lung adenocarcinoma. Objective: Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome (BHDS) is an inherited disorder caused by genetic mutations of folliculin (FLCN). Multiple pulmonary cysts and repeated episodes of pneumothorax are the characteristic features of individuals with BHDS. How to make the differential diagnosis between BHDS-associated pulmonary cysts (BHDSPC) and other cystic lung diseases is incompletely understood in pathology practice. Method: We investigated the radiological and pathological features of BHDSPC in 73 individuals diagnosed by genetic testing. In addition to surgical specimens, one autopsied case was included. The histopathological features of BHDSPC were compared with those of various cystic lung diseases originally confused with BHDSPC, which included primary spontaneous pneumothorax, lymphangioleiomyomatosis, Sjoegren syndrome and chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Results: BHDSPC were preferentially located in the lower lobes. Grossly, cysts had very thin walls with a smooth and glistening inner surface, which histopathologically was lined by a layer of flat or cuboidal alveolar epithelium with the surrounding parenchyma showing no fibrosis unless accompanied by inflammation. Many of the cysts were closely associated with or partially incorporated into interlobular septa and/or bronchovascular bundles. Some cysts showed a multi-septate pattern. Conclusion: The BHDSPC was grossly and histopathologically distinct from other cystic lung diseases. The nature of the cyst may be a hamartomatous formation of giant alveolus-like structure. Objective: Mucoepidermoid lung carcinoma is uncommon salivary gland-type tumour that usually occurs in youth with nonspecific symptoms. The aim is to present a case of mucoepidermoid lung carcinoma of 60-year-old man with dyspnea. Method: Solitary pulmonary nodule in right upper lobe was seen radiologically. There were no changes seen during bronchoscopy and transbronchial needle biopsy of the lesion was done for cytological and histopathological examination. Results: Cytologic smear stained by May-Gruenwald-Giemsa consisted of cylindrical, squamous cells and mucus. In histopathological material stained by hematoxylin-eosin, desmoplastic stroma with moderate lymphoplasmacytic inflammation was mixed with irregular cohesive small and moderate size polygonal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and pleomorphic vesicular nuclei. There were also goblet cells with Periodic-Acid-Schiff and Alcian Blue positive basophilic cytoplasm and basal nuclei, arranged in cysts filled with mucus, positive for the same stains. Diffuse cytoplasmic panCK, membrane EMA positivity in both cell types, intensive nuclear p63 positivity in polygonal cells and nonspecific cytoplasmic CD117 reaction were obtained using immunohistochemistry. Low-grade mucoepidermoid lung carcinoma was diagnosed and surgical treatment was indicated. Conclusion: Mucoepidermoid lung cancer is a diagnostic challenge. Carefully diagnosing is important because most of the low-grade carcinomas have great outcome after surgery. PS-13-026 PD-L1 expression in primary lung carcinoma and lymph node metastasis M. Kovacevic * , I. Kern, U. Janzic * University Clinic Golnik, Dept. of Pathology, Slovenia Objective: PD-L1 expression in tumour cells predicts better response rate in lung carcinoma patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors. We wanted to determine connection between PD-L1 expression in primary tumour and lymph node metastasis. Method: We studied 32 resected primary lung carcinomas (15 adenocarcinomas, 13 squamous, 2 small cell and 2 adenosquamous) and their mediastinal lymph node metastases. FFPE sections were prepared using PD-L1 rabbit monoclonal antibody (clone SP142, Roche, USA) on an automated staining platform (Benchmark ultra, Roche, USA). PD-L1 expression was evaluated on tumour cells with membranous staining. PD-L1 positivity was defined by cutoff value of 1 %. Results: PD-L1 was expressed in 47 % primary carcinomas (20 % adenocarcinomas, 77 % squamous, 100 % adenosquamous and in 0 % small cell). 25 % lymph node metastases expressed PD-L1 (33 % adenocarcinoma, 46 % squamous, 50 % adenosquamous and 0 % small cell). All PD-L1 positive lymph node metastases had PD-L1 positive primary carcinomas. 47 % of PD-L1 positive carcinomas had PD-L1 negative lymph node metastastasis. Conclusion: We concluded that the finding of PD-L1 positive metastatic lymph node is diagnostic for PD-L1 expression in primary tumour, while the finding of PD-L1 negative lymph node metastasis is not, since the difference of PD-L1 expression in primary tumour and lymph node metastasis is significantly different. Lung adenocarcinoma with enteric differentiation: Immunohistochemical and molecular profiles A. Nottegar * , F. Tabbò Objective: Lung adenocarcinoma with enteric differentiation (LAED) has been recently recognized in the WHO classification. It is defined as an adenocarcinoma in which the enteric component exceeds 50 % and have to show the expression at least of one immunohistochemical marker of enteric differentiation. Although its definition is very important, above all in the differential diagnosis between a primary lung tumour and a metastasis of colorectal adenocarcinoma, this cancer still lacks a distinctive immunohistochemical and molecular signature. Method: We recruited a large series of LAEDs and we evaluated the immunohistochemical and molecular profiles of these adenocarcinomas. Results: In our series, CDX-2 and CK7 were the immunohistochemical markers mostly expressed by PAEDs. There was an inverse relationship between the expression of pnuemocytes-markers, such as TTF-1, and intestinal markers. Molecular analysis revealed K-RAS as the most frequently mutated gene, with very few cases harboring abnormalities affecting EGFR, B-RAF and ALK genes. LAEDs are morphologically very heterogeneous. Conclusion: The immunohistochemical profile based on CDX-2 and CK7 positivity of LAEDs appears very robust to support this diagnosis, and it is applicable also on small biopsies. KRAS appears as the most important mutated genes in such tumours. Objective: To highlight the rate of these mutations in different organs with metastatic lung adenocarcinoma and its practical significance. Method: We investigated EGFR, HER2, BRAF mutations and ALK rearrangement in 1400 cases of cytology, biopsy and surgically resected specimens. The rate of these genetic mutations or rearrangement was determined for each organ. Results: We observed mutated EGFR in 14.97 % of pleural metastasis (31 out of 207), in 4.96 % (8 out of 161) of lymph node metastasis, in 11.36 % of bone metastasis (10 out of 88), in 5.40 % (4 out of 74) of brain metastasis and in 24 % of liver metastasis (6 out of 25). ALK rearrangement was found in pleura (3.86 %), brain (2.70 %) and lymph node (0.62 %) metastasis. Lymph node and liver metastasis showed HER2 mutations in 0.62 % and 4 % respectively. BRAF was mutated in pleural (2.41 %) and lymph node (1.24 %) metastasis. KRAS mutations were present in most metastatic sites with different percent. Conclusion: Pathologists should be aware that mutation or rearrangement rate is highly different according to the site of the specimen. These results could help pathologist to prioritize molecular studies in case of insufficient material. Central versus peripheral carcinoid tumours of the lung D. Nonaka * * The Christie Hospital, Dept. of Histopathology, Manchester, United Kingdom Objective: Pulmonary carcinoid tumours occur in both central (endobronchial) and peripheral locations, and subtle clinicopathological differences have been observed. Recently we reported OTP (orthopedia transcription factor) as a useful marker for the diagnosis of lung carcinoid, and, during the investigation, found differences between OTP-positive and negative tumours. Method: 107 resected carcinoid tumours were subdivided to three subgroups based on OTP and TTF1 (clone 8G7G3/1) expressions; type 1 (OTP-/TTF1-), type 2 (OTP+/TTF1-), type 3 (OTP+/ TTF1+), and histopathological parameters were compared among those subgroups. Results: There were 21 cases in type 1, 32 in type 2, and 54 in type 3. Significant differences were seen between type 1 and 3 in gender, presence of sustentacular cells (STCs), location, circumscription, cell morphology, and presence of neuroendocrine hyperplasia (NH). Type 1 was characterised by male predominance, central location, lesser frequency of STC, well-circumscription, polygonal cell type, and no association with NH while type 3 was characterised by female predominance, peripheral location, presence of STC, and strong association with NH. Type 2 showed features in between. Conclusion: Given the significant differences between type 1 and 3, lung carcinoid tumours may represent a group of tumours with heterogeneous pathogenesis. Further studies are required. Caveolin-1 in the differential diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma and lung adenocarcinoma Z. Bozdag * , E. Tutar, O. F. Dizibuyuk, K. Bakir * Gaziantep University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Pathology, Turkey Objective: Caveolin-1 (CAV-1), is a structural protein of the endocytic caveolae plasma membrane, has a profound role in modulating tumourigenic processes. Many researches suggest the eligibility of this protein in discriminating between two malignancies; the lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) and malignant mesothelioma (MM). In this study we aimed to demonstrate the value of Cav-1 staining in the distinguishing between MM and LAC. Method: Paraffin-embedded blocks from surgical material of 68 MM (51epitheloid, 12 bifasic and 5 sarcomatoid type) and 61 LAC were obtained from the archive of Pathology Department at Gaziantep University. The cases were stained with Cav-1 mouse monoclonal antibody then, percentage of positive tumour cells was scored as negative if there is no staining, and positive if more than 1 % tumour cells have been stained. Results: Cav-1 expression with a membranous and ⁄ or cytoplasmic pattern was detected only in 22 of MM (15 epitheloid, 5 bifasic and 2 sarcomatoid type) and only four cases of LAC showed a positive staining with Cav-1. The internal positive control which was detected in all cases was the alveolar or endothelial cells around the tumour and inside it. Statistically, there was no significant difference between two groups. Conclusion: Cav-1 has no significant role in differential diagnosis between MM and LAC. Method: Immunized mice (n = 10) 7 weeks old received twice injections subcutaneously with an emulsion of COLV (150 μg) and complete Freud's adjuvant (FA) in a 30 days interval, followed by two intramuscular boosters of COLV and incomplete FA. After 75 days from the first immunization, pulmonary and cutaneous remodeling was evaluated by histomorphometry and immunohistochemistry. Results: Lung from immunized mice presented a significant higher amount of type I collagen (p < 0.005), lymphocytes CD4 (p = 0.002), TGF-β (p < 0.0025) and CTGF (p < 0.0001) when compared to control. In addition IM presented significantly cutaneous inflammatory process (p < 0.0068) and predominance of fine fibers compared the thick collagen identified by assessment of picrosírius respectively (p < 0.0001). Objective: The understanding of pulmonary fibrosis (PF)has been focused on model forinjuries and dysfunctionsof epithelialorendothelial cells. However, recent study showed that pulmonary artery adventitia (PA) and myofibroblastmay act as biological processing center and critical regulator of remodeling. Our aim was to investigate the role of mesenchymal stem cells-and conditioned medium treatment in remodeling of PF. Results: The sclerosing pneumocytoma is benign lung tumour derived from primitive respiratory epithelium. This is a rare tumour usually asymptomatic, occurring in 80 % of cases among middle-aged women. Chest X-ray shows a solitary and well circumscribed mass. Histologically, the SP is characterized by solid, papillary, sclerotic, and haemorrhagic regions. The tumour consists a dual population of surface cells resembling type II pneumocytes and round cells, with slightly different histogenetic profiles. Regional lymph node metastases are rare. Conclusion: Sclerosing hemangiomas of the lung are generally considered benign lesions, and surgical excision is curative without the need for additional treatment. Results: We report a 19 year-old female who consulted for general checkup. X-ray and CT scan images found incidentally diffuse sandstorm images in both lungs. Lung biopsy was done and morphological examination showed numerous round intra-alveolar calcifications consistent with Pulmonary Alveolar Microlithiasis. Her sister who was asymptomatic at that time was also tested in relatives check-up, and her radiologic images showed some diffuse sand like opacities in both lungs. Results: The patients were 7 female and 6 male, 9 of cases were younger than 1 year. The accompanying lung tissue was diagnosed as normal pulmonary parenchyma (n = 9), bronchopneumonia (n = 1), bronchiectasis (n = 2) and one did not have any tissue other than CCAM. The cysts of all of the cases were lined by pseudostratified respiratory epithelium. Three cases had multifocal mucinous epithelial lining which formed protruding mucinous tuftings. Mucinous epithelium was positive for MUC5 and negative for MUC1 and 2. Squamous metaplasia was seen in 2 cases. Smooth muscle, mostly focal, around the cysts of CCAM was found in all cases. In only one case, bronchial glands was noted. Within the cystic areas of all of the cases, chronic inflamatory cells were present, and lymphoid follicules was detected within the cystic areas of 6 cases. None but one case had bronchial glands within the cystic area of lesion. Results: The highest incidence of malignancy occured in the first (100 %) and third (65 %) decades and the most common malignancy during the first four decades of life was malignant lymphoma (42 %). The most common presenting symptoms were dry cough (40 %), chest pain(42 %), dyspnea (39), weight loss (22 %) and pleural effusion (10 %). Twelve percent of patients were completely asymptomatic. The majority of tumours and cysts were located in the anterior mediastinum (51 %). 65 (46 %) patients had hilar masses or masses in the middle mediastinum. A minority of lesions (4 %) were in the posterior mediastinum. The highest rate of malignancy was observed in anterior mediastinum (55 % malignancy rate). The most frequent diagnosis were mediastinal sarcoidosis (25 %), malignant lymphoma (10 %), tuberculosis (10 %) and tymoma (7 %). Objective: To report a case of a thymolipoma associated to a thymic cyst, an association that, to our knowledge, was previously reported only once in the literature. To describe briefly the pathologic aspects of these two benign uncommon entities. Method: A 63-year-old woman consulted with a persistent cough of 1 year duration. Physical examination was unremarkable. Thoracic CT scan showed an anterior mediastinal oval mass of fluid density. Tumourectomy was performed due to the symptomatic nature of the mass. Results: The specimen was a 6 × 4,5 × 3 cm mass, weighing 60 g, comprising a solid part of fatty appearance and a cystic cavity of 4 × 3 × 3 cm, with a thin smooth wall, filled with clear liquid. Histologically, the solid part was made of two components: nonproliferative thymic tissue and abundant lobules of mature regular adipocytes. As for the cystic cavity, it was made of a fibrous wall comprising residual thymic parenchyma, lined by simple cuboidal epithelium. The diagnosis of a thymolipoma associated with thymic cyst was retained. Conclusion: Thymolipomas and thymic cysts are rare tumours of the anterior mediastinum, they can be responsible for non-specific clinical manifestations, only pathological examination confirms the diagnosis. The combination of these two entities is an exceptional occurrence. Results: She went on standard chest roentgenogram, to exclude pneumonia after common-cold, which showed centraly located nodular mass. CT revealed nodular mass in posterior mediastinum, measured 40 × 35 mm. Total sternotomy was performed and mass completely resected. Histologic examination showed mixed patern of epithelioid and retiform components embedded in a myxohyaline stroma, also there was areas which resemble arteriovenous malformation. Immunohistochemistry stains (CD31, CD34, ERG) confirmed neoplasm of vascular origin. Conclusion: Vascular mesenchymal tumours are not uncommon in the mediastinum, but they usually located in anterior or middle mediastinum. This case is presented because posterior mediastinum is unusual and rare location for vascular tumour, especially with this histologic patern. A schwannoma arising in a mediastinal lymph node: A case report P. Ravazoula * , K. Kekempanou, E. K. Nikolatou, D. Koumoundourou * University Hospital of Patras, Dept. of Pathology, Greece Objective: Schwannoma is an extremely rare primary tumour of the lymph node. Very few genuine cases of benign schwannoma arising in a lymph node have been reported in the literature. We describe a case of a schwannoma that arose in a posterior mediastinal lymph node. Method: Material: A 43-year old woman had experienced dyspnea for 3 months. A CT scan test was performed which showed a mass of heterogeneous density in the posterior mediastinum. The patient underwent a surgery and the tumour was sent at the pathology lab. Results: On gross examination the mass measured 2.8 cm in greatest diameter and was totally encapsulated. Histological sections from the mass showed a lymph node exhibiting focal effacement of its arthitecture by a well circumscribed and bland looking spindle cell lesion. The spindle cells were organized in fascicles while areas with nuclear palisading were also present. No atypia or presense of mitoses was found. The spindle cells were positive for S-100 protein and Vimentin while they were negative for smooth muscle actin, desmin and CD34. The diagnosis was that of a primary lymph node Scwhannoma. Conclusion: Because of the rarity of this intranodal tumour, it is important to distinguish it from other primary and metastatic spindle cell tumours that can arise in a lymph node including palisaded myofibroblastoma. Intranodal Scwhannoma seems to have a totally benign behavior. PS-14-008 Metaplastic thymoma in 22 year-old male patient G. Narli * , Z. Kucukodaci, F. Candas, I. Yilmaz * Gata Heh Traning Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey Objective: Thymoma is the most common neoplasm derived from epithelial cells of thymus. Primary thymic epithelial tumours characterized by a biphasic histologic appearance are uncommon. Method: 22 year-old asymptomatic man, an anterior mediastinal mass was detected on routine chest radiography. Computed tomography scan reveals a homogenously enhancing soft tissue mass in the anterior mediastinum. Gross examination; the tumours were not capsulated but well circumscribed, and measured 60 × 30 mm. Results: Microscopic exmination; The tumours were composed of anastomosing islands or broad trabeculae of epithelial cells disposed among delicate spindle cells. The normal thymic tissue was observed at the periphery of lesion. The epithelial cells were oval to polygonal with eosinophilic cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei and small prominent nucleoli. Groove and pseudoincluson seen in epithelial cells. The spindle cells showed a short fascicular or storiform growth pattern, and were bipolar processes. The two components were sharply delineated. mitotic figüre and necrosis was not observed. Rare lymphocytes were observed between the epithelial and spindle component. Immunohistochemically, the epithelial cells were diffusely and strongly positive for cytokeratin and EMA focal positive. While the spindle cells were strongly positive for viementin, and CD-117 were negative. Kİ-67 proliferation index was 5 %. Conclusion: Metaplastic thymoma is an extremely rare variant of primary thymic epithelial neoplasms with only a few cases reported in the literature. Only 32 cases reported in the english literature, that our patient is the youngest among these cases. Clinicopathological and histomorphological features of thymic cysts: Is thick fibrous wall associated with multiloculation? E. Bozkurtlar * , D. Filinte, R. A. Ahiskali * Marmara University, Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey Objective: Thymic cysts are rare cystic masses in mediastinum. This study aims to represent characteristic morphological features of thymic cysts. Method: Eleven cases of thymic cysts were identified in retrospective search of the surgical database of our institution from 2010 to 2016. H&E stained slides were evaluated to identify detailed histomorphological features of cysts. Results: The patients were 7 female and 4 male ranging from 6 to 66 years (median 33 years). The accompanying thymic tissue was diagnosed as normal thymic tissue (n = 3), atrophic thymic tissue (n = 4), hyperplasia (n = 3), and thymoma (n = 1). One case had parathyriod tissue in pericystic area. Six cases (55 %) were unilocular, and 5 cases (45 %) were multilocular. Thick fibrous wall was found in 8 cases of thymic cysts (73 %), and 63 % of these cases with thick fibrous walls were multilocular cysts and all of multilocular cysts represented thick fibrous walls. Four of 11 cases had ciliated one layer or pseudostratified epithelial lining, and 7 had single or multilayered cuboidal or squamous epithelial lining. Foreign body type giant cells, cholesterol clefts and histiocytes were seen in lumen of cyst and pericystic tissue of 3 cases, keratin was noted in lumen of cyst and pericystic tissue of one case . All of cases containing/with foreign body type giant cells, cholesterol clefts and histiocytes were multilocular cysts. Unilocular cysts showed nothing intraluminal or in pericystic tissue. Conclusion: Thick fibrous wall and presence of foreign body type giant cells and cholesterol clefts in the lumen and pericystic tissue of cyst is more likely to be associated with multiloculation of thymic cysts. Objective: Acne vulgaris (AV) is a multifactorial disorder of the pilosebaceous unit. Several studies have reported that Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), FoxO1 and mTOR interaction is proposed to be the key to understand the influence and link between genetic and environmental factors in acne vulgaris. The aim of this study was to evaluate the immunohistochemical detection of mTOR and, FoxO1 in skin and the serum level of IGF-1 in patients with acne vulgaris. Method: This study was carried out on 60 participants, 40 acne patients and 20 socio-demographically cross-matched healthy volunteers as controls. A detailed diet questionnaire was taken from acne patients and controls. Serum level of IGF-1 was measured using ELISA technique, skin biopsies were taken from lesion on the back of acne patients and normal skin of the back of healthy volunteers, and FoxO1 and m-TOR expression was detected using immunohistochemistry. Results: A significantly higher serum IGF-1 level was found in acne patients compared to controls. The cytoplasmic expression of FoxO1 was found significantly more in the acne group while in the control subjects this expression was likely to be nuclear. Both cytoplasmic and nuclear expression of mTOR was significantly higher in intensity in acne patients compared to controls. Excess consumption of high glycaemic load diet was significantly associated with higher serum level of IGF-1 and cytoplasmic expression of FoxO1 and mTOR. Conclusion: These results suggest that FoxO1, m-TOR, serum IGF-1and high glycaemic load diet may have a role in acne pathogenesis. Objective: An autosomal dominant form of diffuse non-epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma, palmoplantar keratoderma of Bothnian type, is caused by mutations in the AQP5 gene encoding the cell-membrane water channel protein aquaporin 5 leading to defective epidermal-waterbarrier function in the epidermis of the palms and soles. Method: Genomic DNA purified from a blood sample from the proband was analyzed using bidirectional Sanger sequencing of the AQP5 gene. Results: We report the first Danish family diagnosed with diffuse nonepidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma in which 14 individuals are potentially affected. The proband, a 36-year-old male had since childhood been affected by pronounced hyperhidrosis of the palms and soles along with palmoplantar keratoderma. He reported a very distinctive feature of the disorder, as he developed pronounced maceration of the skin with translucent white papules and a spongy appearance following exposure to water. The patient presented recurrent fungal infections, a wellknown feature of the condition, but also periodic worsening with pitted keratolysis and malodour due to bacterial infections. Objective: Seborrheic keratosis (SK) is the most common benign dermal neoplasms in elderly individuals. Extramammary Paget disease (EMPD) is a type of in situ adenocarcinoma, often with some degree of apocrine differentiation and it's occurrence in combination with seborrheic keratosis is extremely rare. Method: A 71-year-old female presented to our hospital with a well demarcated pigmented lesion on the scalp, measuring 1,1 × 1cm, which was completely excised. Results: Microscopically the lesion was well defined, composed of bland and pigmented basaloid and squamous cells, with formation of pseudohorn cysts. Admixed with the epidermal keratinocytes there were neoplastic cells, isolated or forming small nests, with large nuclei, prominent nucleoli and abundant pale cytoplasm (focally PAS+, PAS/D+). These cells were immunopositive for CK7, GCDFP-15, CK8, CEA, EMA and HER2 1+ and focally 2+. S100, Mart1, HMB45, CK20, ER, PR were negative. The patient underwent thorough examination to exclude the possibility of an underlying internal malignancy, with negative results. A diagnosis of EMPD within a SK was established. Conclusion: Cutaneous neoplasms with two or more distinct cell populations frequently pose a diagnostic challenge to both clinicians and pathologists. Although malignant transformation has been reported in SK, Paget's disease in a pigment SK is very rare and may be overlooked. Objective: Malignant melanoma usually metastasizes to skin (other areas), lungs and area between lungs, liver, brain, bone, GI tract, heart, adrenal glands, kidneys, spleen and others. Method: We report the case of a 81-year-old white female who presented with a rapidly growing dark brown lesion on her right ear auricle. A nodular malignant melanoma, 2 cm in greatest diameter, Clark level V a n d B r e s l o w t h i c k n e s s 0 , 9 c m w a s d i a g n o s e d a n d immunohistochemically confirmed. The excision had been successfully carried out and the patient was referred to a centre for chemotherapy. Results: Six months after the initial diagnosis the patient underwent routine examinations and pancytopenia was detected. The bone marrow biopsy showed 25 % infiltration by atypical melanocytes, a finding consistent with metastatic malignant melanoma. Hypoplasia of all the haematopoetic cell lines was also found. CT examinations didn't reveal other metastatic sites. The patient was referred to a tertiary centre for chemotherapy. Conclusion: Metastases of malignant melanoma to the bone marrow are very rare. They usually occur in 5 % of patients with disseminated disease and in up to 45 % when an autopsy is performed. Objective: Skin involvement in multiple myeloma (MM) is uncommon observed in 5 to 10 % of MM. We aim through these cases to describe the clinical presentation, epidemiological and histopathological features of this entity and insist on its poor prognosis. Method: We describe two cases of MM with skin involvement diagnosed in pathology departments of Sfax and Gabes Hospitals. Results: We report the cases of two men aged respectively of 56 and 31 years; both presented with multiple violaceous nodules of the trunk. The youngest patient was known carrying a MM in incomplete remission since 1 year, whereas a MM was diagnosed in the first case. Histopathologically, both skin lesions revealed a dense dermal infiltrate of plasmablasts strongly immunopositive for CD138. No karyotype abnormalities were evidenced in the initial karyotype of the second patient while complex abnormalities including 17p deletion were found in the first case. The latter received poly-chemotherapy reaching a partial remission with no recurrences detected within 6 month follow-up while the youngest patient died 1 month after extramedullary-relapse. Objective: Report a rare epidemiological presentation of Merkel cell carcinoma(MCC) of the skin, occurring in the right elbow of a dark skinned woman. Method: 58 years old non "Caucasian" woman who presented a Merkel cell carcinoma of the posterior face of the right elbow. She had a dark skin. She presented first with a stage II disease and had a biopsy excision and was lost of follow up for 4 months. She presented with recurrent disease on the inferior third of the right arm with three metastatic ipsilateral axillary lymphadenopathyconfirmed after biopsy. The treatment decision was to perform an amputation of the right arm and ipsilateral axillary lymph node dissection with adjuvant radiotherapy. She stayed controlled for 6 months after the end of radiotherapy and then presented with lung metastasis and died from respiratory failure. Objective: Angiolymphoid hyperplasia with eosinophilia (ALHE) is a locally proliferative lesion composed of channels of small blood vessels surrounded by lymphocytes, eosinophils and plasma cells, with etiopathogenesis uncertain. Method: Clinical-pathological features of seven cases with ALHE were studied. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded skin biopsies were stained for CD31, CD3, CD20, IgG and IgG4 to determine a possible relationship with IgG4 plasma cells. Results: Five women and two men (age range, 30-66 years) were seen with localized head and neck lesions. Histologically, there were epithelioid vascular proliferation, with mixed inflammatory infiltrate of T-cells CD3+, associated with CD20+ lymphoid aggregates and a variable numb e r o f e o s i n o p h i l s ( m e a n 1 0 6 . 8 / H P F, r a n g e 2 0 -2 8 5 ) . Immunohistochemically, most IgG-expressing plasma cells were positive for IgG4 (IgG4/IgG ratio = 51-83 %). Conclusion: ALHE is heterogeneous condition and share features with cutaneous IgG4-related disease. Further characterization of the disease process is needed to confirm this observation. Method: Histological slides and pathological reports from 137 primary gastrectomies and corresponding lymphadenectomies performed at a Brazilian university hospital were reviewed. Whole-tissue sections from each primary tumour and from paired lymph node metastases in 85 cases were submitted to immunohistochemistry. HER2 status was confronted with clinicopathological parameters to assess statistically significant associations. Results: HER2 overexpression was found in 17/137 primary tumours (12.4 %) and 12/85 metastatic lymph nodes (14.1 %) . There were associations between intestinal-type tumours and tumour differentiation and HER2 expression in primary tumour (P = 0.026 and P = 0.005) and metastatic samples (P = 0.008 and P < 0.001). The concordance rate was of 88.2 % (κ-value: 0.515). There were 10 discordant cases, from which five cases (5.9 %) were HER2 positive in the primary cancer and negative in nodal metastases, while five cases (5.9 %) were negative in the resection specimen and positive in metastatic deposits. Conclusion: Since eligible patients for anti-HER2 treatment may remain undetected if immunohistochemistry is performed only in primary tumour samples, HER2 testing in lymph node metastases is encouraged. Pancreatic-type mixed acinar-endocrine carcinoma arising from the stomach: Clinicopathological, immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analyses K. Kusafuka * , K. Muramatsu, T. Nakajima * Shizuoka Cancer Center, Dept. of Pathology, Sunto-Gun, Japan Objective: Although acinar cell carcinoma (ACC) is usually a neoplasm arising from the pancreas or salivary glands, this tumour has been known to arise rarely from the stomach. We examined ACC with neuroendocrine differentiation of the stomach; this tumour is recently termed as "pancreatic-type acinar-endocrine carcinoma (MAEC) of the stomach". Method: We selected MAEC from pathology file of Shizuoka Cancer Center, Shizuoka, Japan, during 2002-2015, and examined them clinicopathologically and immunohistochemically. One case was examined ultrastructurally and with double-immnofluorescent staining. Results: Three cases (0.06 %) of MAEC were extracted; case 1 was 81 year-old Japanese male, who is alive without disease, 3 years after operation; case 2 was 56 year-old Japanese female, who died of disease, 3 months after operation with peritoneal dissemination; case 3 was 62 year-old Japanese male, who died of disease with multiple liver and lymph node metastases, 8 months after operation. Histologically, all cases showed sheet-like or solid nest-like growth of amphophilic ovoid atypical cells, which accompanied with acinar pattern. Immunostaining showed the positivity for both the neuroendocrine markers such as CD56, chromogranin-A, and synaptophysin and the acinar cell markers such as lipase and alpha-amylase. Only case 2 was positive for BCL10. Ultrastructurally, the cancer cells included 200 nm electron-dense neurosecretory granules and 500 nm electron-lucent zymogen granules. Some cancer cells were double positive for chromogranin-A and alpha-amylase. Conclusion: MAEC of the stomach is extremely rare. This tumour is positive for both neuroendocrine markers and acinar cell markers. Gastric MAEC is limited to the immunopositivity for BCL10, whereas lipase is a useful marker for acinar differentiation. Objective: Standard care for locally advanced, rectal cancers (LARC) consists of chemoradiation therapy (CRT) followed by surgery. The response rate to CRT has important prognostic impact. Different tumour regression grade (TRG) systems were developed, however no standardization is incorporated in clinical practice. This study aimed to compare distinct TRG systems to assess both inter-observer and intra-observer variability. Method: Twenty LARCs were prospectively included at the University Hospitals, Leuven. Tumour regression was scored on 4 separate time intervals by four pathologists according to Mandard, Dworak, CAP, Ryan, Becker, Schneider and Rödel. Inter-observer and intra-observer agreement were assessed via kappa-statistics. Results: Intra-observer agreement was best for Becker (k = 0.944) and Schneider (k = 0.932). Both systems are based on estimating the percentage of residual tumour, resulting in low inter-observer reliability (k = 0.576 and k = 0.567). Ryan (k = 0.742), Dworak (k = 0.709), CAP (0.636) and Mandard (k = 0,633) scored similar for inter-observer agreement, but intra-observer agreement was best for CAP (k = 0.888), followed by Dworak (k = 0.880), Ryan (k = 0.855) and Mandard (k = 0.845). Conclusion: Assessment of the TRG is important for prognostication. Estimation of residual tumour results in low levels of inter-observer agreement. CAP and Dworak turned out to be the most robust systems. Objective: We report the observation of a 37-year woman referred for severe constipation with occlusions becoming worse after pregnancies. Method: A subtotal colectomy followed 2 years later with proctectomy was examined with immunohistochemistry. During surgery, no peritoneal or genital lesion was noticed. Results: Histological examination of samples of colon, rectum and distal ileum found a diffuse pathologic muscularis propria affecting both muscular layers at the three intestinal levels: additional disorganized muscle coats filled submucosae and spreaded into subserosae, forming parietal nodular bundles composed with mature bland smooth-muscle cells, stained with actin and desmin, without mitosis, atypia or other cellular component notably endometriosis. CD117, DOG1, S100 stained exclusively normal Cajal cells and normal enteric plexus discarding stromal or Schwann-cell proliferations. Estrogen and progesterone receptors were expressed in nuclei of muscular bundles. Conclusion: We retained the diagnosis of a diffuse ileo-colonic leiomyomatosis responsible for chronic intestinal pseudo-obstruction. To our knowledge, this is the first report of digestive leiomyomatosis with such a diffuse small bowel, colonic and rectal presentation without peritoneal location. The peculiarity of our observation is the worsening of symptoms after pregnancies, attributed to hormonal stimulation of the intestinal muscle expressing strongly estrogen and progesterone receptors. Results: Thirty nine out of 73 (53.4 %) patient were identified to have raised intraepithelial lymphocytes, ten patient were 18 years or below and 29 patients were above 18 years. In our study, we considered the upper limit of normal intra epithelial lymphocytes (IELs) as 25 IELs/100 enterocytes. We applied the criteria for modified MARSH grading system to our patients and we found that most of our cases were classified as normal (33 patients), followed by followed by grade 1 (30 patients) and grade 3 (9 patients) (P < 0.0001). 11 patients with modified MARSH grade 1 (36.67 %) were positive for one or more of antibodies, which are antitransglutaminase antibody, antigliadin antibody and antiendomysial antibody. Conclusion: In conclusion, the grading system will help and guide for further evaluations for the suspected cases and to start the management early. The finding of a raised IEL count with normal villous architecture is clinically significant and must be highlighted in routine duodenal biopsy reports. Results: EGFR expression of distal EBD carcinomas was 26.2 %, 6.0 % and 6.0 % in the weakly positive, moderately positive, and strongly positive groups, respectively. HER2 expression was 5.9 %, 3.6 %, 1.2 % in the weakly positive, moderately positive, and strongly positive groups, respectively. All cases of strongly positive EGFR expression showed amplification (n = 1) or high polysomy (n = 4) of the EGFR gene and 3 cases (60 %) of moderately positive EGFR expression also showed high polysomy. One case of strongly positive and 2 cases of moderately positive HER2 expression showed amplification of the HER2 gene. EGFR expression was associated with shorter cancer-specific overall survival (p = .005). Conclusion: Although further study is warranted, our finding suggests anticancer therapeutics against EGFR and HER2 receptors may be an effective therapeutic options for some subsets of distal EBD carcinoma patients. Objective: CD24 is known to be a putative marker of stem cell and tumour metastasis. The study aims to verify the clinicopathologic values of CD24 expression in adenoma and colorectal adenocarcinoma (CRC). Method: A total of 7 whole tissue sections of malignant polyp containing the progression from adenoma to CRC, 48 adenomas and 161 CRCs arranged as tissue microarray were examined by immunohistochemistry for CD24. Associations of CD24 expression with clinicopathologic parameters were also analyzed. Results: In the normal mucosal epithelia, CD24 was not detected. Cytoplasmic CD24 expression increased from adenoma to well to moderate differentiated CRC and was decreased in poorly differentiated CRC (p < 0.001). In the CRCs, cytoplasmic expression of CD24 was inversely correlated with high-grade differentiation (Grade 1 to 3), tumour size and pathologic TNM stage (I-III versus 4) (p = 0.005, p = 0.03, p = 0.006). The statistical associations between CD24 expression and overall and disease-free survival rates were not seen. Conclusion: Cytoplasmic CD24 plays important roles in carcinogenesis, and the differential pattern of CD24 expression between well to moderate differentiation (G1 and 2) and poorly differentiation (G3) in CRC implies overexpression of cytoplasmic CD24 is an early process, through adenoma to invasive carcinoma. Objective: Traditional serrated adenoma (TSA) is a serrated polyp that has a predilection for the left colon. The aim of the study is to describe a mucin-rich variant of TSAs (MrTSA). Method: One hundred and forty-one TSA were retrieved in the departments of Pathology (UHN and Oxford). Age, sex, site, presence of conventional dysplasia, association with other polyp types, frequency of ectopic crypt foci (ECF) and content of goblet cells were recorded and compared to classic TSA (cTSA). Arbitrarily, TSAs that consisted of more than 50 % goblet cells were classified as mucin-rich TSAs (MrTSAs). The number of ECFs was quantified as low (1-10) and high (>10). All the TSA included in this study showed the typical serrated pattern. Results: Of the 141 TSAs, 22 fulfilled the criteria for mrTSA. There was a slightly higher male predominance of mrTSA but no age difference compared to cTSAs. While both occurred most commonly in the left colon, mrTSAs were relatively more frequent in the right (28.6 %) than in the left colon (12.6 %) (p = 0.012). Ten of 22 mrTSAs were associated with other polyp types: 8 sessile serrated adenomas (SSA) and hyperplastic polyps (HP) (3 TSA/HP, 2 TSA/SSA and 3TSA/SSA/HP) and 2 with tubular adenomas. mrTSAs showed a lower frequency of ECF than cTSAs (p = 0.001). Objective: Explore the role of mutant K-ras signaling in inflammationdriven tumourigenesis and the involvement of interleukins in colorectal tumourigenesis progression. Method: Inhibition of Ras signaling using Manumycin A and Sequence Analysis of K-ras exon 1 in colorectal cancer patients. Immunohistochemical analysis of IL-17, IL-22, IL-23 using ELISA SPOT and correlation with GM-CSF and IFN-γ expression levels in cancer tissues. Results: Specific interleukins are differentially expressed in K-ras positive patients and the use of K-ras inhibitor Manumycin A decreases both interleukin levels and apoptosis in Caco-2 cells by inhibiting cell viability. In addition, inflammation-driven GM-CSF and IFN-γ levels are modulated through interleukin expression in tumour patients, with interleukin expression in the intestinal lumen and cancerous tissue mediated by aberrant K-ras signaling. Conclusion: Collectively, the findings a) indicate that interleukin expression is influenced by ras signaling and specific interleukins play an oncogenic promoter role in colorectal cancer, highlighting the molecular link between inflammation and tumourigenesis, and b) accentuate the interwoven molecular correlations as leads to new therapeutic approaches targeting neoplasia. Objective: In the 21st century pancreas adenocarcinoma will be the 4°c ancer death cause in the Western world since its rate of incidence equals its mortality rate, assuming a high fatality rate. The intent of this study is to compare the preoperative radiology studies with the postsurgical pathology studies. Method: A retrospective study was performed with 75 patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma surgery in Miguel Servet Hospital, Zaragoza (Spain) by the surgery pathology department in collaboration with the radiology department. Several variables were chosen to analyze the correlation between the two studies. A statistical study was performed, including first, a descriptive study and inferential in second term. The results show that the study population is a good representation of general population, since the results can be extrapolated to articles published to date. It shows that multidetector CT is the best technique today for the preoperative staging of the pieces of DPC, but shows serious deficiencies with the correlation of these pieces in surgery patholoy studies. Conclusion: 1. The AP remains the "gold standard" in the staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 2. There is a good correlation between both studies in retroperitoneal margin, peripancreatic fat infiltration and duodenum infiltration. 3. There is no statistical correlation between both studies in tumour size and infiltrated regional lymph nodes. cases. Acellular mucin pools in 8 non-mucinous cases were considered as total regression (Dworak 4). Craniocaudal extension <3cms, yT, cN0, yN0, cM0, yM0, total/subtotal regression (Dworak 3/4) were significantly associated with longer CSS and DFS (P < 0,05). Mucin pools had not prognostic significance in cases with complete pathological response. Craniocaudal extension and yN were significant independent variables. Regression grade was an independent prognostic factor for DFS. Conclusion: Pathological tumour regression by Dworak score has prognostic significance in rectal cancer treated by CRT. Presence of acellular mucin pools in surgical specimens is not related with mucinous histotype, while it is associated with clinical behaviour similar to that of cases with total regression and absence of mucin pools. Objective: Metastatic nodules in perigastric adipose tissue without evidence of residual lymph node (LN) structure (ND) have been identified in gastric cancer (GC). However, the morphological features and clinical significance of ND have not been clarified in gastric cancer. This study was to clarify the actual status of distribution and prognostic impact of ND in GC. Method: A retrospective study was performed for 1148 consecutive GC patients underwent curative gastrectomy with regional lymphadenectomy at a single tertiary care center between 1996 and 2009, focusing on the impact of ND detected by routine H&E staining on disease-free survival (DFS) and cancer-specific survival (CSS). Results: ND was detected in 16.0 % of patients in our cohort. The ND status was significantly correlated with tumour size, infiltration depth, and TNM stage (P < 0.05). Patients with ND showed significant shorter DFS and CSS than those without ND (P < 0.0001for both). Univariate analysis showed the variables affecting CSS included CA19-9, tumour size, lauren classification, tumour differentiation, gastric wall invasion, LNM, distant metastasis, TNM stage, and ND (P < 0.05 for all). Multivariate Cox proportional analysis identified ND as an independent predictor for CSS (P = 0.022). Conclusion: The presence of ND is a risk factor for cancer progress and an independent predictor of poor survival in GC after curative resection. Results: Among the patients, the median age was 61.0 years, with a maleto-female ratio of 2.85:1. The 5-year DFS and CSS rates were 53.6 and 68.9 %, respectively. In the univariate analysis, perineural invasion(PNI), pathological stage, serum alkaline phosphatase(AKP), serum C-reactive protein(CPR), white blood cell count, blood neutrophil count, neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio(NLR) and blood mononuclear cell count were significantly correlated with patients' outcome. The multivariate analysis suggested that PNI, AKP, CPR and NLR were independent prognostic factors for CSS; while PNI, CPR and NLR were found to be associated with DFS independent of other clinicopathological parameters. Objective: Anomalies in cell cycle regulation can lead to abnormal proliferation resulting in tumourigenesis. The aim of the study is to correlate cell cycle regulation on oesophageal adenocarcinoma progression using chromosomal analysis and protein expression of cell cycle markers. Method: Samples from 77 patients (squamous n = 12, Barrett's n = 16, low grade n = 13, high grade dysplasia n = 23 and adenocarcinoma n = 13) were immunostained for p53, Ki67 and E2F. DNA ploidy was carried out using image cytometric analysis. Multivariate analysis using Kruskall-Wallis test was used to compare between the histological grades. Results: Multivariate analysis across the 5 groups showed the strongest association with progression to be with E2F (p = 0.0007) followed by Ki67 (p = 0.0075) and p53 (p = 0.0325) being the weakest. Ploidy data showed increase in aneuploidy in HGD and OAC with average DNA index scores of 1.45 and 1.32 respectively. Conclusion: E2F is most upregulated marker with strong contribution from HGD and OAC compared to SQ. Ki67 showed upregulation in the earlier NDBE all the way to HGD and OAC. However p53 only showed upregulation in OAC. Ploidy analysis showed aneuploidy increase in HGD and OAC. Taken together, this suggests that cell cycle regulation plays crucial role in the progression to OAC. Objective: Barrett's oesophagus (BO) occurs as a consequence of inflammatory response triggered through prolonged reflux and may precede the development of adenocarcinoma (OAC). T-cell activation has been shown to play a role in the progression to OAC. The aim of this study is to assess the potential role of Tcells/immune checkpoints as biomarkers in the BO progression. Method: 77 patients' samples, including normal squamous (n = 12), nondysplastic Barrett's (n = 16), low grade (n = 13), high grade dysplasia (n = 23) and adenocarcinoma (n = 13) were stained with antibodies against Survivin, PD1, FOXP3 and CTLA-4. Protein expression was scored with Allred system. Mann-Whitney and Kruskall-Wallis tests were used for statistical analysis. Results: CTLA4 expression was upregulated in the dysplasiaadenocarcinoma sequence but not at the stage of metaplasia (p =0.003). Survivin was progressively upregulated across the different stages (p < 0.0001). There was no significant difference in PD1 or FoxP3 expression between any of the histological groups. The results show that T-cells / immune checkpoint contribute to the progression of BO to OAC, in addition to survivin. This study adds further evidence to the use of immune checkpoint blockade in upper gastrointestinal cancer, but further studies are needed to assess the relationship of tumour-associated lymphocytes and the metaplasia-dysplasiaadenocarcinoma sequence in BO. Objective: Lymph node involvement is a major determinant of prognosis for colorectal cancer (CRC) patients. We analyzed pathological factors related to lymph node retrieval and evaluated the prognostic impact. Method: The number of retrieved lymph nodes was assessed in 381 CRC patients (excluding patients with neoadjuvant treatment) and was related to different clinicopathological variables. Progression-free (PFS) and cancer-specific survivals (CSS) were determined using the Kaplan-Meier method. Results: Median number of retrieved lymph nodes was 21 (mean 21, range 1-56) in right-sided, 13.5 (16, in left-sided and 17 (19, 3-68) in rectal tumours. It was higher in patients with positive lymph nodes. The number of retrieved lymph nodes was associated with Tclassification (p < 0.001), UICC stage (p < 0.001), tumour size (p = 0.03), localization (p < 0.001) and length of the operation specimen (p < 0.001). In T3/T4 patients (n = 283), both PFS (p = 0.044) and CSS (p = 0.029) were significantly longer, when >12 lymph nodes had been retrieved. Also, in T3/T4 N0 patients (n = 130) retrieval of >12 lymph nodes was associated with improved PFS (p = 0.037) and CSS (p = 0.029). Conclusion: The number of lymph nodes retrieved was associated with adverse outcome in intermediate stages of CRC. High T-classification, tumour size, localization and length of the operation specimen were associated with increased number of lymph nodes. The prognostic significance of Cerb-B2 expression in gastric carcinomas B. Babaoglu * , A. Akyol, C. Sokmensuer, G. Gedikoglu * Hacettepe Universitesi Sihhiye, Ankara, Turkey Objective: Cerb-B2 overexpression of some solid tumours, particularly breast cancer, has been related with prognosis and response to treatment. But there are a limited number of studies on this subject in gastric cancer. In this study, we tried to determine the relationship between prognosis and Cerb-B2 expression in patients with gastric adenocarcinomas. Method: 46 patients diagnosed with gastric adenocarcinoma in our department, between 2011 and 2015, were retrospectively investigated with respect to clinical and pathological aspects. All patients were Cerb-B2 positive and some of the patients were re-evaluated with the FISH method. Results: Clinical follow up 37 of the 46 patients evaluated with Cerb-B2 could be retrieved. Mean follow-up of these patients was 9.6 months and 4 patients had died over this period. 31 of 37 patients had received chemotherapy and metastases were detected in 33 of them. 21 of 46 patients were evaluated with the FISH method. 10 of 11 patients with Cerb-B2 score of +3 were also FISH positive but one of them was negative. Metastasis was identified in 33 patients including; 21 patients with a cerb-B2 score of +3, 9 patients with a Cerb-B2 score of +2 and 1 patients with aCerb-B2 score of +1. Conclusion: In this study presence of Cerb-B2 expression was seen to led to increased metastasis and aggressive behavior therefore Cerb-B2 positivity and degree can be used as a prognostic factor in gastric adenocarcinomas. Objective: Inflammation supports the different phases of cancer development, being one of the main factors of risk and prognosis in colorectal cancer (CRC). Granzyme A (gzmA) induces an pro-inflammatory response in macrophages and epithelial cells, regulating the production of cytokines in vivo and in vitro. We have now analyzed the contribution of gzmA to the development of CRC of inflammatory origin using different drugs. In parallel the presence of gzmA in colic tissue from patients with CRC has been analysed. Method: Ulcerative colitis (UC) and CRC was induced in C57Bl/6 wild type (wt), granzyme A KO (gzmA-/-) and granzyme B KO (gzmB-/-) mice using 2,5 % DSS in drinking water alone (UC) or in combination with a single dose of Azoxymethane. Disease evolution was monitored during 2 months. Mice were evaluated after 60 days. The production of inflammatory mediators was quantified in cultures of colic tissue ex vivo. Results were evaluated using two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's posttest and considered statistically significant if P < 0,05. Results: GzmA-/-mice showed a clinical score lower than wt controls. The survival of the animals in the GzmA-/-group during the phase of acute colitis was higher than 80 % in contrast to that observed in the wt mice (lower than 40 %). Necropsies revealed that macroscopic and microscopic damage were significantly lower in GzmA-/-mice. The analysis of the development of tumours in the distal region of the colon of animals treated with DSS/azoxymethane evidence a lower incidence, number and size in the GzmA-/-group. Conclusion: This data suggest that inflammation induced by gzmA contributes to CRC development in vivo. Objective: Epithelial serration, ectopic crypt foci (ECF), and cytoplasmic eosinophilia are typical features of traditional serrated adenomas (TSA); though they may be observed in conventional tubulovillous adenomas (TVA). When there is accompanying adenomatous dysplasia, the differential diagnosis becomes more difficult. The term"serrated TVA" (STVA) has recently been introduced to define TVA with serration. We, hereby, present a series of TSAs with filliform architecture and adenomatous dysplasia resembling TVAs. Method: Eleven filliform TSAs showing epithelial serration, ECF and cytoplasmic eosinophilia in more than 50 % of the polyp were analysed, using an immunohistochemical panel including CK7, CK20, MUC2, MUC 5AC, MUC6, CDX2, Beta-catenin, p16, p53, and Ki67. Results: Nine polyps were located in the rectosigmoid while 2 were in the proximal colon. Three cases had intramucosal carcinoma, one had high and the remaining showed low grade dysplasia (7/11). Dysplastic areas showed diffuse positivity with Ki67 and p53, and Beta-catenin. Gastric foveolar differentiation was observed focally in all with MUC5AC expression whereas, 5 polyps showed focal CK7 positivity and 3 demonstrated MUC6 positivity. All polyps were diffusely positive with MUC2, CK20 and CDX2. Objective: Cancer development is influenced by the host's immune system. Data collected from large cohorts demonstrates that the immuneclassification has a prognostic value that may be superior to the TNMclassification. Evaluation with Immunoscore (I) methodology could be a useful prognostic marker in patients with colorectal cancers. Method: Intratumoural immune reaction was investigated in 20 colorectal tumours from a total of 166 diagnosed in 2011 at Emergency County Hospital Timisoara. Cytotoxic (CD3) and memory (CD45RO) T cells were quantified by immunohistochemical analyses of tissue sections in the center (CT) and the invasive margin (IM) of the colorectal tumours. The results were correlated with patient survival. Densities of CD45RO(+) and CD3(+) cells in tumour regions (CT/IM) classified the patients into four prognostic groups. The four groups were associated with dramatic differences overall survival (all P < 0.0001). The Immunoscore provides a score ranging from (low densities of both cell types found in both regions), to 4 (high densities are found in both regions). The Immunoscore could be a useful prognostic marker in patients with colorectal cancer. The combined analysis of CD3(+) and CD45RO(+) cells in specific tumour regions could provide a useful criteria for the prediction of survival. Objective: To reveal influence of the expression of betaI-and betaIIIisotypes of tubulin on CRC outcome. Method: The study was performed on surgical material of 125 CRC. Double immunofluorescence with anti-cytokeratin and anti-betaI-or anti-betaIII-tubulin antibody was performed. Expression was analyzed by image analyses software and was calculated as ratio of integrated density to epithelial region's area and normalized according to positive and negative controls. Results: The expression of betaI-tubulin was significantly elevated in CRC (p = 0,000). Lower values of betaI-tubulin expression in CRC were associated with lower disease-free (p = 0,008) and cancer-specific survival (p = 0,015). BetaIII-tubulin was almost absent in normal mucosa, but was present in CRC cells (p = 0,000). Elevated value of betaI-tubulin in CRC was associated with lower disease-free (p = 0,002) and cancerspecific survival (p = 0,022). Increased expression of betaIII-isotype in tumour budding was associated with lower disease-free survival in patients on 5-FU chemotherapy (p = 0,010). Conclusion: These results demonstrate for the first time that betaI-tubulin expression is increased in CRC, but lower levels of this isotype are associated with worse survival. Expression of betaIII-tubulin is also increased in CRC, but higher level of it is associated with worse survival. Upregulation of betaIII-tubulin in tumour budding could be important for determination of 5-FU resistant patients. Objective: To reveal changes in the level of betaI-isotype of tubulin in IBD. The study was performed on biopsy fragments of colonic mucosa from 61 patients: 12 with Crohn's disease (CD), 27 with ulcerative colitis (UC) and 22 controls. Double immunofluorescence with anti-cytokeratin antibody and anti-betaI-tubulin was performed. Expression was analyzed by image analyses software and was calculated as ratio of integrated density to epithelial region's area and normalized according to positive and negative controls. Results: The expression of betaI-tubulin was detected in epithelial cells in both inflamed and normal colonic mucosa. In joined IBD group the level of betaI-tubulin was significantly reduced (p = 0.000). But in the group of CD the expression was increased comparing with both control (p = 0.029) and UC groups (p = 0.000). The linear regression revealed significant relation of betaI-tubulin with the presence of dysplasia (p = 0.000). No relation was found with disease activity signs, mucus depletion and crypt depletion. Conclusion: These results demonstrate for the first time that betaI-tubulin expression is altered in IBD and this phenomenon has the opposite directions in CD and UC. Further investigations are needed to understand clinical significance of these findings. Florid T-cell lymphocytosis in appendix could be misinterpreted as T-NHL F. Iordanidis * * Gloucestershire Hospitals, NHS Trust, Cellular Pathology Laboratory, Cheltenham, United Kingdom Objective: Intravascular lymphocytosis (IVL) in appendectomy specimens is a fairly common phenomenon and should not be confused with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Here, an exuberant intravascular T-cell lymphocytosis at the tip of the appendix, extending into the serosa and subserosal tissues is presented. Method: 28-year-old female referred to hospital with acute abdominal pain. Laparoscopic appendicectomy was performed. The gross examination showed an appendix measuring 49 mm in length and 6 mm in diameter with inflamed tip. Results: The microscopic examination revealed intravascular accumulation of monomorphic small lymphocytes in the serosal vessels, at the tip of the appendix, which extended into the subserosal tissues. There was no evidence of acute appendicitis. Immunohistochemistry showed that these small lymphoid cells were positive for CD3, CD5 and bcl-2. Staining for CD20, CD10, bcl-6, CD23, TdT, CD34, CD56, MUM-1, Cyclin-D1, CD30, CD3 and EBV (EBER) was negative. Ki-67 staining showed a very low proliferation index. Gene rearrangement for T cell clones demonstrated no evidence of monoclonal T cell population. Objective: Cdx2 is a homeobox domain-containing transcription factor that is important in the development and differentiation of the intestinal cells and served as a potential biomarker of tumour progression in early intestinal-type gastric cancer. The aim of this study was to evaluate the frequency of Cdx2 in gastric carcinomas and to investigate its expression in these tumours. Method: It was a retrospective study of 32 cases with primary gastric carcinoma that were analyzed over a period of 1year and a half. The follow-up period varied between two and 48 months. The expression of Cdx2 in gastric carcinomas was detected using immunohistochemical method. Results: Cdx2 expression was detected in 34 % (11 cases/32) of gastric cancer cases. Expression of Cdx2 was significantly higher in intestinaltype carcinomas than in diffuse-type carcinomas (82 versus 10 %; p < 0,01). Moreover, positive expression of Cdx2 was mainly found in moderately to well differentiated gastric carcinomas (p < 0,05 Results: CD44 staining was associated with intestinal morphology, lymphovascular invasion and desmoplastic response. ALDH-1 staining was seen in proximally located and low grade GAdCs. Lgr5 staining was correlated with low grade and low stage. No relationship was found with CD44 ve ALDH-1 whereas increased survival was associated with Lgr5 staining (p < 0.05). Conclusion: The relationship between CD44 and poor prognostic factors may indicate that CD44+ cells are the actual cancer stem cells and they may play a role in planning the treatment. ALDH-1 staining was closely related with proximal GAdC, reflecting that these stem cells could be particular to this location. Lgr5 staining seen in low grade and early stage tumours may reflect their role in earlier steps of carcinogenesis. The Objective: SATB2 has been shown to be a sensitive marker of normal colorectal epithelium and colorectal adenocarcinoma (CRC). The aim of the present study was to compare the possible differences in SATB2 expression between primary CRCs and their corresponding liver metastases, and to elucidate the use of SATB2 as a promising biomarker for identifying CRCs in a metastatic setting. Method: In this study, we utilized immunohistochemistry to stain SATB2 in tissues arrays containing 337 primary and 78 liver metastatic adenocarcinomas from different digestive anatomic sites. Conclusion: A positive association between CRC prevalence and several diet-related genes mutant-genotypes were observed. It seems that deregulation of genes involved in OSM, FM and LM processes seems to have an important role in p53 inactivation. Our results provide preliminary evidence that mutations in diet-related genes may be risk factors for CRC. Objective: Interleukin-1 (IL-1) pluripotent cytokine is responsible for the mediation of immunological functions. Inflammation with altered expressions patterns triggers colonic inflammation and cancer susceptibility and development was studied to correlate with colorectal cancer (CRC). We intended to investigate IL-1A, IL-1B and IL-1RA common polymorphisms in CRC development risk. Method: A total of 50 CRC biopsies and 100 blood samples from healthy subjects control group, were genotyped for IL-1A -889T>C; IL-1B -511C>T, IL-1RA 11100T>C polymorphisms using commercially available kits. Objective: Lanthanum carbonate (LC) is an orally administered phosphate binder for end-stage renal disease patients. Its absorption has been thought to be minimal. Recently, a few cases showing lanthanum deposition in the gastric biopsy specimen were reported in Japan. We evaluated lanthanum deposition and its spreading in the gastrectomy specimen. Method: 81-year old woman and 67-year old man who undergo hemodialysis and take LC as a phosphate binder were received subtotal gastrectomy for gastric cancer. We checked the specimen microscopically and confirmed LC deposit by scanning and transmission electron microscopy-energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy for the former. Results: Lanthanum deposition were observed in the metaplastic atrophic area extensively and also in the regional lymph nodes. Its deposition was found at neoplastic area, too. They have shown no adverse effect so far. Conclusion: These findings suggest that lanthanum is absorbed in the stomach and transported via lymph flow. And deposition would be associated with intestinal metaplasia, which might be a reason why lanthanum deposition was reported by only Japanese, who mostly carry intestinal metaplasia in gastric epithelium. Objective: To investigate the immunohistochemical expression of βcatenin and Sox-2 in adenomatous polyps and adenocarcinoma of colon, also evaluation effect and significance of these markers in adenomacarcinoma sequence. Method: There were 56 tubular adenoma with low grade displasia(TALGD), 53 tubular adenoma with high grade displasia(TAHGD), 44 tubulovillous adenoma(TVA), 29 villous adenoma(VA) and 60 adenocarcinoma. Nuclear staining of Sox-2 and β-catenin and also cytoplasmic staining of β-catenin were evaluated. Semiquantitative scoring was performed. Results were compared between groups. The relationship between the findings and clinicopathological parameters were evaluated. Results: Nuclear β-catenin expression was higher in adenocarcinoma than polyps. The expression in the polyp groups was higher in VA, TVA, TVA than TAHGD, TAHGD and TALGD, respectively. Cytoplasmic β-catenin expression was significantly higher in adenocarcinoma than VA, TVA, TAHGD and TALGD groups; in VA higher than TVA, TAHGD and TALGD; in TVA higher than TAHGD; in TAHGD higher than TALGD. There were significant differences between nuclear β-catenin and tumour differantiation and lymphovascular invasion. Nuclear Sox-2expression was higher in adenocarcinoma and TVA than VA. Objective: The higher risk of small bowel carcinoma (SBC) in Crohn's disease (CD) patients is well-documented, but remains an uncommon event, usually diagnosed after a long-standing history of the latter. We report a very unusual case of a signet-ring cell carcinoma (SCC) presenting as a first manifestation of CD. A 59 year-old female, with a prolonged history of colitis of unclear etiology, was admitted with 3 month-long intestinal obstructive symptoms, abdominal pain and weight loss. Computed tomography scans showed severe ileal wall thickening with segmental strictures, suggestive of CD. Diagnostic biopsies revealed SCC and therefore the patient underwent distal enterectomy and sigmoidectomy. Results: Grossly, there were serosal adhesions, ileal mucosa ulceration with cobblestone pattern and wall thickening, with segmental stenosis along the specimen. Histologically, ileal SCC was confirmed, involving contiguous intestinal loops and sigmoid wall; transmural inflammation, myoenteric hyperplasia and fibrosis in non-infiltrated areas were also evident. The case was signed off as a SCC associated with CD. Conclusion: Despite being an uncommon complication of CD, small bowel carcinoma should be kept in mind when dealing with enterectomy specimens. The pre-operative diagnostic challenge raises awareness about the absence of surveillance methods for malignancy in the small intestine, namely in inflammatory bowel disease patients. Objective: Intramural lymph node (ILN) spread of digestive carcinomas is an extremely rare event (in the literature there is a single report of an oesophageal carcinoma with metastasis to a gastric ILN). Herein we report a case of gastric carcinoma with ILN metastasis in the submucosa of the stomach and discuss the implications for staging. Method: A 55-year-old man was referred to our Hospital after the detection, on gastric endoscopy, of an ulcerated lesion (1 cm in diameter) diagnosed as adenocarcinoma. The patient was submitted to radical subtotal gastrectomy. Results: The histological examination revealed a mixed gastric carcinoma, with tubular and poorly-cohesive cell components and focal invasion of the muscularis propria (pT2). Two submucosal ILNs were identified, localized away from the tumour, both with metastases of the tubular component. No other metastases were found in the remaining lymph nodes identified in the specimen. The tumour was staged as pT2N1, and the patient was started on chemotherapy (XELOX regimen). Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first description of ILN metastasis from a gastric carcinoma, in keeping with the rarity of this situation. For staging purposes, ILNs should be considered as regional lymph nodes and staged as pN1 (x/total lymph node count). Endoscopic ultrasonography with fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) as essential tool in diagnosing advanced pancreatic neoplasms ( Objective: Acute appendicit is the most common cause of abdominal surgery in children. The major objective in dissecting an appendectomy specimen is to document the presence or absence of inflammation and confirm the diagnosis. If the pathology report is as no appendicitis then clinical search for other causes should be performed. In routine practice of macroscopic appendectomy evaluation, one section each from the base, body and tip and additional sections from inflamated or perforated area are performed. Method: In the present study we first undertaken routine sections in two casette then exampled the rest of appendix totally. The diagnosis of routine exampled sections and total examination were compared. Results: A total of 87 appendectomies were examined of which 58.6 % male with a mean age of 11.7 (1-18 years). The diagnosis was changed in 14 (16 %) cases. In 8 (9.1 %) cases the diagnosis of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia changed as acute focal appendicitis (early appendicitis), in 4 (4.5 %) cases acute suppurative appendicitis as acute suppurative and perforated appendicitis, in 2 (2.2 %) cases acute perforated appendicitis as acute perforated and gangrenous appendicitis. Conclusion: Total macroscopic examination of the appendectomy specimen in cases of negative appendicitis would improve the diagnosis and can document early appendicitis cases. Our aim was to study the clinicopathologic spectrum of GNET. Method: Histopathology and immunohistochemistry slides of all GNET cases diagnosed at our institute were retrieved and diagnosis was confirmed. EWSR1 rearrangement was assessed by fluorescent in-situ hybridisation (FISH) in 5 cases. Clinical details were recorded from patient charts. Results: Seven cases were studied. Median age was 44 years; male-tofemale ratio was 0.4:1. Tumours originated in small intestine (n = 4), stomach (n = 1), rectum (n = 1) and retroperitoneum (n = 1). Histologically an admixture of clear, epithelioid cells in nested pattern with ovoid to spindle cells in fascicles was seen typically. Scattered osteoclastic giant cells were present in 2 cases. Diffuse immunoreactivity for S-100 (6/7) and variable reactivity for CD56 (2/2) & synaptophysin (2/3) was seen. Specific melanocytic, gastrointestinal stromal tumour, epithelial and myoid markers were immunonegative in all. All 5 cases tested by FISH showed split EWSR1 signal. Nodal and distant metastases were seen in 3 patients each. Conclusion: GNET is a distinctive clinicopathologic entity with aggressive biology. Awareness of its clinicopathologic spectrum is essential in distinguishing it from its mimics. Results: The median age was 58 years and the female-male ratio was 1. The tumour was located in the pancreas in 13 patients (32.5 %), stomach in 13 patients (32.5 %), colon in 5 patients (12.5 %), rectum in 2 patients (5 %), small intestine in 5 patients (12.5 %), liver in 2 patients (5 %). The tumours were identified as grade 1 in 24 patients (60 %), as grade 2 in 10 patients (25 %) and as grade 3 in 6 patients (15 %). All small intestine neoplasms were grade 1. ) , grade, infiltration, number of analyzed and involved nodes, and pTN (UICC classification, 7th edition) were indicated in over 95 % of cases. Vascular emboli were present in 81 %, state of the surgical margin and perineural invasion in 70 %. The perforation was mentioned in only 35 % and the value of circumferential margin (mm) for rectal tumours in 16 %. These results were improved by the use of the standardized report. Conclusion: Global quality of CRC pathological reports was high with good guidelines compliance. Better implementation of standardized reports in laboratories should be expected. We pointed out difficulties to correctly apply some criteria which could impact accurate patient's management. Results: Intraobserver agreement was excellent (k = 0.82) for dysplasia (D) vs ND and moderate (k = 0.47) for LG/IND. Interobserver agreement was substantial (k = 0.64) for ND and D, moderate (k = 0.59) for LGD and poor (k = 0.14) for IND. From the patients diagnosed as LGD by 2 or more pathologists, 62,5 % progressed to HGD or ADC. Conclusion: Intraobserver and interobserver agreement is moderate for LGD diagnosis, and poor for IND, even between GI pathologists. When at least 2 pathologists agree with LGD diagnosis, the risk of progression is high, so ablation in such cases seems justified. anal melanomas harbor KIT mutations. In human somatic cells, telomeres shorten with each replicative cycle, eventually leading to cellular senescence. Telomerase activity is detected in approximately 90 % of malignancies, allowing tumour cells to bypass senescence and achieve unlimited proliferative potential. Recently, mutations in the TERT promoter region at positions 124 and 146 bp upstream of the ATG start site have been described in tumours from multiple organ systems, including sporadic and familial cutaneous melanomas. These mutations carry a UVsignature and portend a poor prognosis in cutaneous melanoma. The purpose of this study was to investigate the prevalence of hotspot mutations in the TERT promoter region in a cohort of anal melanomas. Method: 15 cases of anal melanoma were collected from the United States, Canada, and Germany with approval from respective Institutional Review Boards. After microdissection to enrich for lesional tissue, DNA was isolated from FFPE tissue and analyzed for hotspot TERT promoter mutations by real time PCR using allele specific probes. Results: 13 of 15 cases had sufficient amounts of DNA for analysis. TERT promoter hotspot mutations were absent in 12 cases and indeterminate in one case of primary anorectal melanoma. Conclusion: TERT promoter mutations are not prevalent in anal melanomas, and likely do not represent a significant oncogenic driver event in this melanoma subtype. Objective: The histological grade based on gland formation is widely used in colorectal carcinoma (CRC), but its prognostic value is limited by interobserver variability. We aimed to assess the clinicopathological significance of poorly differentiated clusters (PDCs), defined as ≥5 cancer cell with no gland formation in CRC. Method: 50 CRC consecutive resection specimens from Timisoara County Hospital were reviewed. The histological grade based on PDCs counting was assessed on H&E and CD31 immunostained sections. Associations between PDCs and pT1-T2 vs. pT3-T4, nodal status (LNM), distant metastases, peritumoural lymphocytic infiltrate as well as the presence of lymphovascular invasion (LVI) were analyzed using the Chi-square test. Results: Using conventional histological grade 6 % of all the cases were well-differentiated (G1), 82 % moderately (G2) and 12 % poorly (G3) differentiated CRC, while in the PDCs-based grade 14 % were G1, 48 % G2, 38 % G3, respectively. In multivariate analysis PDCs-based grade was significantly associated with LVI (p = 0,0022) and LNM (p = 0,0033). Grading based on glandular differentiation did not significantly correlate with the analyzed parameters. Conclusion: The novel grading based on PCD counting should be considered as a robust and promising prognostic factor in patients diagnosed with CRC. Method: We collected fresh, formalin-fixed, or paraffin embedded material from 25 cases of gastrointestinal specimens containing normal or tumour tissue. FLIM images of unstained preparations were created by a confocal microscope with a pulsed laser at 405 nm, and a timecorrelated single-photon counting equipment. Results: The FLIM technique showed very precisely morphologic details. Lifetime of mucins was generally much lower than that of the cytoplasm of normal or neoplastic cells, thus permiting easily the recognition of mucin production. Signal intensity was usually higher in fresh material than in histologic sections. Conclusion: The FLIM technique permits rapid and efficient screening for mucin production in unstained material and reveals new insights into the histology of mucin producing cells. Objective: Endoglin (CD105) is an pro-angiogenic factor involved in inflammation, as well as in tumoural neoangiogenesis. In ulcerative colitis (UC) its actions are correlated with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). There are some anti-VEGF molecules targeted against this pathway, but further studies are nedeed for better understanding their role in UC pathogenesis. Method: We studied expression of CD105 and VEGF on colonic biopsies from patients with UC at the beginning of the study and 12 months later. The study group included 45 UC patients, who underwent complete clinical and endoscopical evaluation each 12 months. Results: All patients had incresead stromal expressoion of CD105 and VEGF in colonic mucosa lamina propria, with significant corelation of the two markers (t-test two-tailed p = 0.0139). During treatment, expression of these markers decreased concordantly (t-test two-tailed p = 0.0085). Patients with severe incresed of stromal CD105 had a higher risk of relapse and unfavorable evolution. Conclusion: CD105 and VEGF have concordant evolution in colonic mucosa of UC patients, and coorelate with their outcome. These data suggest that they are not only angiogenic factors, but also proinflammatory molecules ands promising therapeutical targets. Objective: It is known that in human cancers, several immune system regulatory checkpoints are altered to escape from immune-control. Program death-1 (PD-1) and program death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) interaction leads to down-regulate immune response and it is one of the most promising immunotherapy target. PD-L1 is highly expressed on cancer cells of various malignancies, including gastric carcinoma (GC). Epstein-Barr virus infected (EBV + ) and microsatellite instable (MSI) GCs are characterized by a peculiar morphology, a high T lymphoid infiltration and a better prognosis. Objective: to investigate the activation of PD-L1/ PD-1 pathway in GCs. Method: 119 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded GCs (19 EBV + , 49 MSI and 51 EBV − /microsatellite stable MSS) were analyzed for PD-L1 and PD-1 immunohistochemical expression. Results: PD-L1 membrane immunoreactivity in more than 5 % of cancer cells was more frequent in EBV + (58 %) and MSI (26 %) than in MSS/ EBV − (4 %) GCs (p = 3 × 10 −5 ). In MSI GCs PD-L1 expression was associated with a better prognosis (p = 0.05). PD-1 + intra-epithelial lymphocytes mean count was significantly different among the three groups (24 cells/HPF in EBV + , 7 cells/HPF in MSI and 3 cells/HPF in MSS/ EBV − ; p ≤ 0.01). Conclusion: PD-L1/PD-1 pathway is selectively activated in a subset of GCs and it could be considered as possible target for therapy. Objective: Although serosal involvement is an important parameter in staging colorectal carcinoma(CCa), it is challenging to recognize it in some cases. Mesothelial lining (ML) and peritoneal elastic lamina(PEL) can be useful markers for deep tumour invasion around the serosal surface. In this study we re-evaluated pT3 and pT4a CCa cases to understand the role of ML and PEL in staging. Method: Among CCa's which were staged as pT3 or pT4a in our department, 46 challenging cases were included. Hematoxylin-eosin(H-E) stained sections were re-evaluated by an experienced gastrointestinal pathologist and 57 tissue blocks were selected for further evaluation with CK7 to demonstrate ML and Elastic Van Gieson (EVG) to outline PEL. Results: In our pathology reports 13 (28 %) cases were pT3 and 33 (72 %) were pT4a. After re-evaluation, among pT3 cases there was serosal perforation in 5 H-E stained slides. CK7 revealed entrapped mesothelial cells within neoplastic cells in 6 slides. These findings up-staged 9 cases (27 %). On the other hand, in pT4 cases, 3 were re-staged as pT3. Because of background staining with EVG, only in 28 % of the cases we could identify PEL. Conclusion: CCa staging could be challenging, mainly due to the decision of serosal involvement. In this study, we underlined the difficulty of deciding peritoneal invasion, even with the eyes of an experienced pathologist. CK7 was found as a useful parameter in this study, consistent with the literature. We did not consider the EVG as a helpful stain in this study, in contrast to the previous literature. Objective: In colorectal carcer, tumour budding (TB) at the invasive front (peritumoural budding -PTB) is associated with poor outcome in multiple studies but clinical relevance of tumour budding within the tumour center (intratumoural budding-ITB) is not yet known. Also there is not an established cut off for high TB. We aimed to compare ITB and PTB in colorectal carcinoma with prognostic parameters. Method: We retrieved HE stained sections from 70 colorectal carcinoma cases. Tumour grade, tumour infiltrating lymphocytes, Crohn like inflammatory infiltrate, and vascular invasion were recorded. The maximum number of tumour buds was determined at the advancing edge of the tumour in a x20 objective and within the tumour center. Cases with >10 and equal to 10 buds were classified as high budding and those with 0 to 9 buds were classified as low budding. Low and high ITB and PTB are compared also for liver metastasis, T and N stage. Results: PTB and ITB are highly correlated (p < 0,001). High ITB was present in 45,7 % of cases, high PTB was present in 52,9 % of cases. High TB is associted with liver metastasis and vascular invasion in both groups. There was no correlation betweeen TB and histologic grade, Chrohn like lymhoid reaction, T and N stage. Conclusion: In conclusion, these preliminary results suggest that both intratumoural and peritumoural budding are associated with poor prognostic factors such as liver metastasis and vascular invasion. We suggest a histologic cut off >10 and equal to 10 for high tumour budding. Investigation of larger series of cases are needed to support our findings.  Objective: To determine if epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) of mesothelial cells contributes to the generation of carcinoma associated fibroblasts (CAF) in advanced intestinal adenocarcinoma. Mesothelial cell origin of CAF has been proved in peritoneal metastases but its contribution to primary neoplasms is less known. Method: We have evaluated 14 surgical specimens corresponding to infiltrative large bowel adenocarcinoma (pT3 and pT4). The immunohistochemical expression of cytokeratin AE1/AE3, calretinin, HBME-1, CK7, CK20, WT1, D2-40, CDX2 and alpha smooth muscle actin (SMA) was evaluated in CAF. Mesothelial to mesenchymal transition is defined "in vivo" by the expression of mesothelial cell markers in cells that show fibroblastic location, morphology and expression of alpha SMA (myofibroblasts). Results: The immunohistochemical study revealed that a subpopulation of intestinal CAF expressed mesothelial cell markers. Such fibroblasts were seen within the tumour as well as in the vicinity of the peritoneal surface. In addition to alpha-SMA they showed variable expression of cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CK7, calretinin, WT1 and other mesothelial markers. CAF showed no expression of CK20 or CDX2. Virchows Arch (2016) 469 (Suppl 1):S1-S346 S171 Objective: To evaluate the clinical fields and to discuss the etiology of gastric granulomatosis in our experience. Method: 24 cases of ganulomatous gastritis were reviewed. Clinicopathologic findings and associated lesions were analyzed. Results: Mean age was 44,6 years [24-74] and sex ratio was 0,33 [M/F = 6/ 18]. Indication of endoscopy was gastric pain (10 cases), chronic diarrhea (4 cases), anemia (2) cases, and vomiting (3 cases). Discovery of gastric granulomatosis was fortuitous in 5 cases. Upper endoscopy was normal in 6 cases, showed antral gastropathy (11 cases). Granuloma was unique in 7 cases and multiple in 17 cases. 6 patients (25 %) had Crohn's disease while 5 had gastric tuberculosis (21 %). In two cases, H Pylori was the retained cause of gastric granulomatosis. In the other patients, the final diagnosis was a foreign body reaction (n = 1), sarcoidosis (n = 2), yersiniosis (n = 1). In our series, seven cases were unclassified. Conclusion: Although many cases remain unclassified, in most cases of granulomatous gastritis, a diagnosis of Crohn's disease or tuberculosis could be established. If these etiologies are excluded, an association with H. pylori is discussed. Objective: To achieve a consensus for reporting tumour budding in colorectal cancer (CRC). Method: The ITBCC was organized into 9 sessions with presentations, a pre-meeting survey, and an e-book including the main literature on tumour budding in CRC. The following statements achieved consensus: Tumour budding is defined as a single tumour cell or a cell cluster consisting of 4 tumour cells or less. Tumour budding is counted on H&E. The hot spot method (in a field measuring 0.785 mm2 at the invasive front) is recommended. A three-tier system should be used along with the budding count in order to facilitate risk stratification in CRC. Tumour budding is an independent predictor of lymph node metastasis in pT1 CRC. Tumour budding is an independent predictor of survival in stage II CRC. Tumour budding should be taken into account along with other clinicopathological features in a multidisciplinary setting. Intratumoural budding exists in CRC and has been shown to be related to lymph node metastasis. Tumour budding and tumour grade are not the same. The ITBCC proposes to include tumour budding in guidelines/protocols for CRC reporting. Objective: According to the 2007 WHO classification of central nervous system tumours, perivascular pseudorosettes are a "histological hallmark" of anaplastic ependymoma. However, glioblastomas may also feature perivascular pseudorosettes, and their distinction from anaplastic ependymoma may present a diagnostic challenge. A 60 year old male presented with a left parieto-temporal brain tumour. Gross total resection showed a high grade glioma with prominent perivascular pseudorosettes, prompting the diagnosis of anaplastic ependymoma. On multidisciplinary review, glioblastoma was favoured. Further to informal discussions with experienced neuropathologists, additional immunohistochemistry for neurofilament protein showed entrapped neurites centrally within the tumour. Olig2 and MAP2, known to stain neoplastic astrocytes of glioblastoma, but not cells of ependymoma were positive. Electron microscopy revealed no ultrastructural features of ependymoma. Review of the H&E stained slides showed an infiltrative tumour border. Results: A revised diagnosis of glioblastoma with ependymoma-like foci was rendered. The tumour recurred 4 months post-excision and adjuvant radiotherapy. The distinction between glioblastoma with perivascular pseudorosettes and anaplastic ependymoma is crucial as the former has a relatively poor prognosis, whereas the latter, being circumscribed, may be adequately treated with gross total resection. Clinical and neuroimaging correlation, and appropriate immunohistochemistry are useful in distinguishing glioblastoma with ependymoma-like foci from anaplastic ependymoma. Results: 10/51 (19.6 %) glioblastomas showed intense granular cytoplasmic ALK immunostaining. All 10 were primary (IDH1R132H-) and only 1/10 displayed multiple alk gene signals with FISH, indicative of gene amplification/polyploidy. ALK overexpression was not detected in secondary (IDH1R132H+) glioblastomas (n = 5). The Ventana method showed higher sensitivity (p = 0.000) but was equally specific compared to the Nichirei. Intense ALK immunostaining was correlated with high proliferation index (Ki67 ≥ 50 %) (p = 0,043). There were no statistically significant correlations between ALK overexpression and clinicopathological variables, p53 expression, and patient overall survival. Conclusion: In glioblastoma, ALK overexpression is infrequent and is rarely the result of underlying alk gene amplification/polyploidy. Although its presence is more frequent in rapidly-growing glioblastomas indicating a more aggressive clinical behavior, ALK overexpression does not appear to affect patients' prognosis. Lipoastrocytoma: A rare case report and review of literature Objective: Lipoastrocytoma is an extremely rare tumour, with only few cases described. We report a case of a low grade astrocytoma occupying right cortical lobe in parafalcine location. Objective: To narrate the clinical and radiologic findings in a case of leptomeningeal melanocytosis in a 22-month old male and describe the autopsy, histologic, immunohistochemical and molecular studies. Method: A partial autopsy (limited to the brain) was done. Results: No abnormal skin pigmentation is noted. The external surface of the brain revealed diffuse dark brown to black discoloration of the leptomeninges over the convexities and base. The cerebellum is macerated. Histological examination show dense mildly pleomorphic cellular infiltrates with pigmentation in the leptomeninges, sparing the ventricles. Tumour cells are immunoreactive to vimentin, S100 and HMB-45. Epithelial, lymphoid and glial markers are non-reactive. Ki-67 labelling is 1-2 %. NRAS mutation (Q61H, 183 A>T) is present. These findings support the diagnosis of diffuse leptomeningeal melanocytosis. Conclusion: Ante-mortem diagnosis is challenging as it is rarely suspected unless histopathologically proven or there are concurrent skin lesions that help suspect neurocutaneous melanocytosis. Given the rapidity of the course of disease once neurologic symptoms set in, diagnosis is usually confirmed only after autopsy. No treatment strategy has been proven to be effective in controlling this disease but clinical trials are currently underway for a viable cure based on the molecular profile of the tumour, emphasizing the need for molecular diagnostics. Objective: Glioblastoma is the most common malignant primary brain tumour in adults, known for its wide spectrum of heterogenicity. PNET is an embryonal-type neoplasm reminiscing the developmental stages of the CNS, almost exclusively encountered in children. It has the capacity to differentiate along glial, neuronal, muscular or melanocytic lines. Tumours demonstrating both PNET features and advanced astrocytic differentiation are limited to individual case reports although some authors suspect they are often underdiagnosed. Method: We report the case of a 25 years old woman, admitted to our hospital accusing headaches. Contrast MRI revealed a right temporal subcortical mass with partially cystic appearance of 56/52/37 mm and a nodular component of 26/20/17 mm. The patient was scheduled for neurosurgery and intraoperative consultation was required. Squash preps and frozen sections revealed a high grade glioma with marked atypia and giant cells. Results: Due to the young age of the patient and radiologic appearance the possibility of a pleomorphic xantoastrocytoma was considered but was eventually dismissed due to the presence of necrosis and atypical mitoses. The tumour was resected and sent for histologic examination. Light microscopy revealed the biphasic nature of the lesion consisting of a giant cell glioblastoma intermixed with a small blue cell component. Method: The submitted material was fixed in 4 % buffered formalin and routinely processed. Sections were stained with HE. Immunohistochemistry was performed on an Omnis autostainer with antibodies against S100, keratins, EMA and brachyury (all Dako). Results: The 2016 sample showed predominantly tumour cells with hyperchromatic nuclei scalloped by cytoplasmic vacuoles. Mitoses were brisk. Tumour cells were negative for antibodies against keratins, EMA and brachyury but stained focally for S100. Reinvestigation of the 2010 material revealed large tumour cells with vacuolated cytoplasm arranged in sheets with moderate atypia. The tumour cells were focally positive for S100 and single cells expressed keratin. Recent brachyury staining on the initial specimen was negative. Conclusion: Pleomorphic liposarcoma is the rarest subtype of liposarcoma, most commonly occurring in the extremities. To the best of our knowledge, we report the first case of pleomorphic liposarcoma arising in the pituitary region. Despite being exceedingly rare, sarcomas should be considered as differential diagnosis of intracranial neoplasms. (Fig 1 and 2) . She had an initial right frontal Venticulo-peritoneal shunt for cerebrospinal fluid diversion, and later a left retrosigmoid suboccipital craniectomy with microscope assisted gross total resection of left hemispheric tumour 1 week later which was complete. Intraoperative finding was soft greyish to yellowish mass with partly cystic consistency and a fairly well defined brain-tumour boundary. There was a leash of tumour vessels that bled briskly. The post-surgery scan is shown in fig 4. She had fever and mild anaemia post-surgery and these were managed. She was discharged from the hospital 2 weeks later with a Karnofsky score of 90 % and is still being followed up in the out-patient. Histology report was cerebellar liponeurocytoma. Conclusion: The rarity of this tumour and paucity of pertinent information regarding its biological potential and natural history have resulted in the application of various treatments. It is suggested that these lesions have much more favourable prognosis than medulloblastomas, and that adjuvant therapy for liponeurocytoma need not be as extensive as that administered for medulloblastomas. No place exists for radiotherapy. Patient is alive and well 1 year after. Anaplastic and meningothelial meningiomas in a single tumour: A "dedifferentiated meningioma"? M. Shintaku * , Y. Adachi, A. Arai, J. Koyama * Shiga Medical Center for Adults, Dept. of Pathology, Moriyama, Japan Objective: The coexistence of anaplastic and low-grade components in a single meningeal tumour has been rarely reported. This dimorphic appearance is reminiscent of "dedifferentiation", a phenomenon infrequently seen in various mesenchymal and salivary gland neoplasms. We report here a case of the coexistence of anaplastic and meningothelial meningiomas in a single tumour. The patient was a 74-year-old man, who developed progressive cognitive impairment and gait instability. Neuroradiological examination demonstrated a large and predominantly extra-axial tumour spreading over the bilateral frontal base, indicative of olfactory groove meningioma. Shortly after the operation, the patient developed a local recurrence of the tumour and multiple metastases to the cerebrum, bone, and skin. Results: The greater part of the resected tumour consisted of a dense, patternless proliferation of large, round, or polygonal cells and the compactly fascicular growth of spindle cells. Tumour cells showed markedly anaplastic cytological features. In small areas of the tumour, a typical meningothelial meningioma showing no cellular atypism was found. Both tumour components were closely juxtaposed, and no pathological features of an intermediate grade (atypical meningioma) were noted. Conclusion: We think that the term "dedifferentiated meningioma" can be appropriately applied to tumours such as that reported herein. Objective: Adenomas are the most common tumours of the pituitary. While their development is still not entierly understood, increased hypotalamic secretion of brain peptides seems to play an important role. While extremely rare, the association of hypothalamic gangliocytoma appears to reflect this relation. Method: We present the case of a 66 years old woman, recently diagnosed with acromegaly. The patient was admitted to the Bagdasar-Arseni Clinical Emergency Hospital for neurosurgical evaluation. Neuroimaging revealed a large mass occupying the sella turcica, encompassing the hypophyseal portal system and compressing the optic chiasma. The tumour was removed through trans-sphenoidal adenectomy. Results: Light microscopy revealed two different cell populations. We identified the unremarkable features of a pituitary adenoma intimately associated with a neuronal proliferation of large, sometimes bi or multinucleated polygonal cells, characteristic for a gangliocytoma. Both components were evenly represented. The exact histogenesis of these combined lesions is not entirely understood. Some authors have suggested pituitary hyperplasia and adenoma may be induced by a primary neuronal neoplasm while others consider that adenohypofisal cells may transform to ganglion cells through the nerve growth factors implicated. Either way, the existence of these mixed lesions should be considered to avoid any possible diagnostic pitfalls. Sudden unexpected death from extraventricular neurocytoma: A case report and review of the literature P. Mylonakis * , D. Anestakis, A. Mitselou * Medical Examiner's Office, Thessaloniki, Greece Objective: The authors present the case of a 35 year-old male who died suddenly and unexpectedly. Method: Full autopsy, histology and toxicological analysis were performed in order to diagnose the cause of death. Results: The only findings related to the cause of death were concerning a spherical tumour of the midbrain, which was pressing on the pons and cerebellum. Histology and immunohistochemistry set the diagnosis of a neurocytoma with positive staining for SY, NF, CD56, and NSE in the cytoplasm, disclosing the neuronal nature of the lesion. Conclusion: The autopsy, histology and immunohistochemistry revealed a primary extraventricular neurocytoma of the midbrain, which was responsible for causing cardiopulmonary arrest and sudden death, through pressure on the pons and cerebellum. Neurocytomas are unusual neuronal tumours, especially affecting young people, commonly arise in the ventricles and have a benign outcome. Currently, these tumours have been well recognized outside the limits of the cerebral ventricules and, in these instances, have been called "extaventricular neurocytomas" (EVNs). Objective: Gemistocytic astrocytomas (GA) are astrocytomas where the content of gemistotcytes exceeds 20 %. A number of gemistocytes in fibrillary astrocytomas (FA) may increase after the combined therapy. Method: MRI detected a homogeneous tumour mass in the left frontal lobe in a 23-year-old male with Gilbert's syndrome and bilirubinemia up to 64 mmol/l in medical history. After removal of the tumour FA with Ki-67 4 % was diagnosed. The patient received radiation and drug therapy. After 6 years, a second operation was performed because of the recurrence. GA (Ki-67 6 %) was diagnosed. Results: Molecular-genetic testing (quantitative PCR) in the first operation material revealed a high level of expression mRNA gene PDGFRα, β-tubulin III, Ercc1, middle level of MGMT, VEGF, TP and low level of C-Kit and TOP2α. In the second operation material there were high levels of TP, β-tubulin III, VEGF, PDGFRα, average level of Ercc1, MGMT, C-Kit and a low level of TOP2α mRNA expression. Also IDH1 gene mutation (R132H) and the absence of 1p19q codeletion in both materials were found. The most significant is the increase in VEGF and TP gene expression levels, which, along with the growth of Ki-67, shows an increase in the malignancy process. Conclusion: It's difficult to prove the role of the different treatment options in this transformation. Gilbert's Syndrome may be a concomitant disease or it may play a role in the described phenomenon because of the increase of unconjugated bilirubin which interacts with the phospholipids of cell membranes, particularly in the brain. Objective: Angiomatous meningioma (AM) is a rare histological variant (2.1 % of meningiomas) in which it is described an increased peritumoural brain edema. We analyze the clinicopathological features and the mast cells index, reviewing their neuroimaging studies and possible correlation. Method: From 692 meningiomas altogether, 2,02 % (14) were diagnosed as AM (median: 60 years old). Most of them were located in the frontal lobe and were surgically treated. Results: Histology of the tumours revealed numerous variable sized blood vessels, hyalinized, in a background of plump spindle cells with oval vesicular nuclei. Vimentin, EMA and GFAP showed positivity, so AM were diagnosed. Using CD117 stain, we observed 0,3 %-3 % of mast cells index depending on the case studied. Peritumoural edema was significative increase on computed tomography. However, we couldn't correlate it with the mast cells index. The majority of the patients had a good prognosis. Conclusion: Radiologically, angiomatous meningiomas have more frequent peritumoural edema. Histologically, they are rich in blood vessels. Surgery is the treatment of choice, adding radiotherapy if tumour remains. Overall, its prognosis is as good as other benign meningiomas. We need more studies to understand the role of the mast cells in the development of the edema and its importance in the diagnosis. Objective: To describe a rare embryonal tumour in a fetus. Method: We present an autopsy case of a female fetus with 19-20 weeks and medical termination pregnancy who showed a central nervous system malformation localized in brain with cystic formations in posterior fossa. Virchows Arch (2016) 469 (Suppl 1):S1-S346 S175 Results: Gross examination demonstrated a tumour mass in brain midline with supra and infratentorial involvement in relation to meningeal cystic formations. Histopathological examination showed hypercellular areas with small cells forming rosettes, with abundant neuropil and frequent mitosis, apparently contiguous with posterior meninges and ventricular space. Conclusion: ETANTR is a rare subtype of central nervous system PNET which affects children under 4 years, with female predominance and poor prognosis. Neoplasia is constituted by undifferentiated neuroepithelial cells with abundant neuropil and ependymoblastic rosettes, commonly with expansive pattern growth. Ependymoblastoma and ETANTR share 19q13.42 amplification at a frequency about 95 %. This tumour is a childhood neoplasia with scare reported cases and we think that this is the first case with fetal presentation. Expression of integrin B4 in relation to decreased invasiveness and increased proliferation in glioblastoma cell lines Method: We selected the first 10 % of invading cells (U87-Inv) from U87MG using laminin-2 (merosin) coated Transwell filters. To characterize the super-invasive cells, we used wound assay, proliferation assay, and RT-PCR for integrin receptors. Furthermore, we compared U87MG and U373MG for invasiveness and integrin β4 expression. We transfected U87MG with pRK5 β4 plasmid DNA, and knocked out integrin β4 using integrin β4 shRNA plasmids in U373MG. Results: Migration rate of U87-Inv increase 20 % compared with relatively lower invasive cells (U87-Non). U87-Inv demonstrated faster wound healing whereas lower proliferative activity. The expression levels of integrin α1, α7, and β1 increased mildly in U87-Inv compared with U87-Non, while the expression of integrin α6 and β4 reduced in U87-Inv. In comparison with U87MG, U373MG showed relatively decreased invasiveness whereas relatively higher proliferative activity. The expression of integrin β4 increased in U373MG compared with U87MG. Integrin β4 transfected U87MG revealed decreased invasiveness and increased proliferation. Integrin β4 knocked out U373MG showed increased invasiveness and decreased proliferation. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that expression of integrin β4 is related to decreased invasiveness and increased proliferation in glioblastoma. Results: Tau-related pathology was seen at all motor levels. The intensity of spinal cord involvement correlated with tau pathology in other areas of the pyramidal system. Six of the cases were found to involve the entire motor system. Conclusion: The pyramidal system and spinal cord were involved in the majority of PSP cases investigated. This involvement can influence PSP clinical symptomatology and potentially lead to a false diagnosis of motor neuron disease or at least significantly influence the differential diagnosis. Objective: Embryonal neoplasms of the central nervous system (CNS) generally arise in the early years of life and behave in a clinically aggressive manner, but vary somewhat in their microscopic appearance. Several groups have reported examples of an embryonal tumour with combined histological features of ependymoblastoma and neuroblastoma, a lesion referred to as "embryonal tumour with abundant neuropil and true rosettes" (ETANTR). Method: We describe the case of a 7-year-old girl with recurrent acute headache for about 6 months ago, bilateral papilledema and intracranial hypertension. MRI of the brain demonstrated an expansive mass located in both frontal lobes midline. Results: Histologically, the specimen appearance was variably cellular, with a mixture of hipercellular regions and many paucicellular fields composed largely of a fibrillar, neuropil-like matrix occasionally containing rare ganglion cells and abundant calcifications. The distintive feature of the ETANTR was the presence of ependymoblastic rosettes. It was treated according to SIOP -PNET protocol 5: chemotherapeutics, radiation therapy and bone marrow transplant. Conclusion: ETANTR is a unique entity, a subtype of CNS PNET, with female predominance and quite different from that the other CNS embryonal tumours. The prognosis is extremely poor. Method: We analized the distribution of iron and calcium deposit in basal ganglia, substantia nigra and dentate nucleus of six brain donors of the brain bank, Navarre, Spain. We also correlated the deposition with the stage of the disease. Results: From the cases studied, two were in each of Vonsatell category (initial, intermediate and advanced). Iron deposition was observed in all cases, being more prominent in caudate and putamen nucleus compared with globus pallidum and substantia nigra. The density was higher in intermediate and almost negative in advanced stages. The iron deposition was observed in macrophages, astrocites and neurons. Calcium cristaloids were also observed in endotelial walls. Results: Sixteen undiagnosed brain tumours were macroscopically detected and microscopically diagnosed as meningiomas of various types. They were grade I, measuring 15 to 50 mm. Two were in the same person. As for cause/manner of death, 1 tumour contributed to the fatal event (SUDEP). Other 2 were at the frontal lobe of victims committing suicide. Another 3 tumours were in 2 drowning cases, whose victims had psychiatric disease/epilepsy antecedents. Meningiomas range 2 %. Their diagnosis is of great relevance, since they may underlay epilepsy; location/size may lead to behaviour/cognitive changes; histopathological type may favour brain hemorrhage. These factors may interfere with cause/manner of death (with medical/judicial implications). Furthermore, tumour genotype may correspond to a "hereditary meningioma", needing family counselling. Objective: Oligoastrocytomas (OA) are gliomas with mixed morphology. The discovery of mutations associated to astrocytic lineage (ATRX), together with the classic 1p/19q codeletion allows avoiding the great subjectivity and disagreement between pathologists, reclassifying them into oligodendrogliomas (O) and astrocytomas (DA). The aim of this study is to retrospectively reclassify OA according to these new guidelines. Method: Twenty-six cases of OA, grade II (19) and III (7) were selected from the pathology files. Immunohistochemistry for IDH1 R132H and ATRX, and FISH for 1p/19q codeletion was performed in all cases. Results: IDH1 R132H mutation was found in 61,5 % of cases (16/26). OA grade II cases were reclassified into 5 O grade II, 5 DA, 6 grade II gliomas NOS, 2 anaplastic astrocytomas (AA) and one OA grade II. Anaplastic OA were reclassified into 4 glioblastomas, 2 AA and one anaplastic oligodendroglioma. In 6/26 cases the new diagnosis implied a higher tumour grade, even a change from low to high grade. Conclusion: There is a need to retrospectively review cases of OA in order to offer patients an accurate treatment. However, even if the majority of OA will be reclassified following the new diagnostic criteria, there is a small subset of true morphologically and molecular mixed tumours. Objective: Heparanase (HPSE) cleaves heparan sulfate and is implicated in diverse physiological and pathological processes. A central pathological event of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is accumulation and deposition of cytotoxic amyloid-beta peptide (AB) in the brain parenchyma. Heparan sulfate proteoglycans are found associated with AB deposits in the brains of AD patients. Method: 7 different areas of 4 brains (1 control, 1 low AD, 1 moderate AD, and 1 severe AD) were obtained. Transcriptional levels of HPSE using RT-PCR and the expression of the protein using immunohistochemistry were centered on Braak & Braak areas and nucleus basalis of Meyner and cerebellum. Results: HPSE is expressed in all studied areas of the control and AD brains. AD brains overexpress HPSE except in nucleus basalis of Meyner. HPSE expression is better related with AB deposits rather than tau deposits. Cerebellum, an apparently non-altered structure in AD showed HPSE overexpression in all pathological cases. Immunohistochemically HPSE is observed at extracellular level in neuritic plaques with a fragmented core. In cells, HPSE highlights some neurofibrillary tangles and reactive astrocytes. Conclusion: Our study has revealed increased expression of HPSE in the brains of AD patients in both extracellular and intracellular levels. Objective: Diffuse infiltrating gliomas (DIG) are currently classified after the criteria defined in the World Health Organization Classification applied on Hematoxylin-Eosin and Imunnohistochemistry cytological features also correlated with prognosis. DIG are subdivided in large categories of astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas and mixed oligoastrocytomas demanding different therapeutic procedures. Molecular pathology became a tool to be applied in daily routine for DIG classification and molecular characterization of 1p/19q co-deletion was sought. Method: A series of 30 DIG with heterogeneous morphology was selected from our files: IDH1 (R132H), GFAP, and p53 expression had been determined by immunohistochemistry as routine diagnostic panel and codeletion 1p/19q was assessed by FISH in paraffin sections. Results: All these 30 cases had co-deletion of 1p/19q positive, confirming oligodendroglial differentiation in ologodendrogliomas, oligoastrocytomas and glioblastomas with oligodendroglial features. Conclusion: Due to DIG histopathological heterogeneity, difficult cases may be validated by 1p/19q codeletion to fill one class or define molecular heterogeneity observed in WHO tumour grading and validate prognosis and treatment. As molecular biomarkers will diminish the difficulty of classifying oligodendroglial lineage of tumours, the implementation of this molecular marker in the framework of routine scheme is essential to improve patient treatment, prognosis and clinical decision, avoiding immunohistochemistry in differential diagnosis of other brain tumours, reducing Pathology practice cost. A rare case of balloon-cell melanoma brain metastasis A. Iliadis * , T. Zaraboukas, P. Selviaridis, A. Chatzisotiriou, G. Karagiannopoulou * Aristotle Univers. of Thessaloniki, Dept. of Pathology, Greece Objective: In recognition of the rarity of metastatic melanomas in the brain of the morphological variant of the balloon-cell type, we report a new case of balloon cell melanoma (BCM) metastatic to the brain of a 54year-old male. Method: The excised tumour tissue was histopathologically and immunohistochemically examined. Results: There was diffuse infiltration of the brain tissue by large, tightly packed, pale neoplastic cells, occasionally of giant size, with an abundant, clear, foamy cytoplasm and relatively uniform nuclei with minimal to mild atypia and few mitoses. These characteristic balloon cells were amelanotic. The neoplasm was arranged in a solid pattern within the white matter with no connection to the meninges. Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells were positive for vimentin, S100, Melan-A and HMB-45, but negative for cytokeratins AE1/AE3 and 8/18, PAX8, calretinin and synaptophysin. Conclusion: The clear cell morphology prompted initial differential diagnostic considerations of various cell types of metastatic carcinoma. However, the positive melanocytic immunohistochemical markers as well as a revealed history of cutaneous melanoma helped to establish final diagnosis. To our knowledge this is only the fourth reported case of metastatic BCM to the brain. BCM can be a challenging diagnosis to make in frozen section and pathology in general. An extremely rare case of a primary cervical intradural malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour with multiple cranial and spinal leptomeningeal metastases L. Chinezu * , R. Chinezu, C. Carasca, K. Siklodi-Palfi, V. Hadareanu, I. Egyed-Zs., A. Borda * UMF Tirgu-Mures, Dept. of Histology, Romania Objective: Cervical intradural malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour (MPNST) is an extremely rare pathological entity, which can give in uncertain circumstances cranial and spinal leptomeningeal metastasis, making the correct diagnosis extremely difficult. Method: A 60-year-old female without history of neurofibroma or prior radiotherapy presented with headaches, back pain and rapid onset of tetraplegia. The imaging of the entire neuraxis revealed a cervical (C3-C4) intradural tumour with infiltration of the spine cord and with additional cerebral and spinal leptomeningeal lesions. The patient underwent cervical laminectomy and tumoural debulking without gross tumour resection as the tumour infiltrated the entire cervical spinal cord. Results: The histopathological examination of the removed tissue revealed tightly packed spindle cells, placed in long, straight fascicles with a herringbone appearance. The tumoural cells were positive for S-100 protein and the proliferation index was more than 10 %. Based on the morphological and immunohistochemical features the diagnosis of MPNST was established. Conclusion: Primary cervical intradural MPNST is a very rare tumour, with only 7 adult cases described in the literature to our knowledge. Secondary cranial and spinal leptomeningeal metastases from an intradural spinal location is even rarer. Benign melanocytic tumour of the brain: Case report N. Goishvili * , M. Jangavadze, I. Khakhutaishvili, I. Kirvalidze * Institute of Morphology, TSU, Dept. of Pathology, Tbilisi, Georgian Objective: Benign melanocytic tumour of the brain is rare finding and diagnostic dilemma for pathologists. We report a case of infratentorial benign melanocytoma in 42 years old female, clinically manifested as a hemorrhagic stroke. MRI reviled infratentorial tumour. Method: Resected tissue was studied by H&E and immunohistochemistry (with anti-Melan-A, CD117, S100, CD99, GFAP, Synaptophysin, AE1/AE3, 34β/E12 and Ki67 antibodies (Leica)). Results: Microscopically tumour consisted of slightly spindled, welldifferentiated melanocytes, containing high amount of melanin. They formed of tight nests, fascicles and sheets. Cells contained oval or beanshaped nuclei, small eosinophilic nucleoli, no cytologic atypia. Mitoses -<1/10hpf. Tumour expressed Melan-A and S100 and was negative for CD117, CD99, GFAP, Synaptophysin, AE1/AE3 and 34β/E12. Ki67 labeled <1 % of nuclei. Conclusion: Based on histopathologic features, differential diagnosis included melanocytoma, melanoma, melanotic schwannoma and meningioma. Unlike our case, melanoma cells are more pleomorphic and has higher mitotic rate. Melanotic schwannoma was excluded by molecular profile (GFAP-, Melan-A+). Tumour also was negative for pancytokeratin markers, which excludes meningioma. Tumour was classified as benign melanocytoma. No adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy was performed. After 16 month of follow up, patient has no recurrence and return to normal life with minimal neurologic complication (slightly decreased field of vision). Results: The median age of the patients was 40 years. The tumours were mainly located in the frontal lobe and 73,7 % presented with seizures. Eight patients underwent complete resection but only seven had no radiological evidence of residual tumour in the follow up. One patient died after the surgery. From the 9 oligodendrogliomas all had ATRX loss of expression, 7 showed mutated IDH1 and 1 overexpressed p53. The 6 diffuse astrocytomas showed ATRX loss of expression, 1 had IDH1 mutated and 5 overexpressed p53. From the 4 oligoastrocytomas 2 had ATRX loss of expression, 2 showed mutated IDH1 and 2 overexpressed p53 being therefore classified as diffuse astrocytomas. Conclusion: We were unable to test for IDH2 mutations or 1p/19q codeletion but IDH1 mutation accounts for 90 % of IDH mutations and ATRX loss of expression and p53 overexpression are almost mutually exclusive with 1p/19q co-deletion. Unfortunately we couldn't correlate the outcome with the expression of any these markers due to the short follow up. Results: Five patients, 1 female and 4 male ranging from 27 to 76 years (median = 45,4 years). Lesions were predominantly located in more than one lobe. One case had a previous biopsy of grade II Glioma and another was initially diagnosed of PNET and the necropsy revealed the presence of MG-PNET. The glial component resembled Grade III Astrocytoma and Glioblastoma. The PNET areas showed high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, hyperchromatic oval shaped nuclei with neuroblastic rosettes and foci of anaplastic cytologic features. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the expression of synaptophysin in PNET areas with focal expression of GFAP. Four patients were followed until dead with a survival from 2 to 26 months (median = 10 months). One patient is alive after 3 months of resection. The presence of neuroectodermal components in malignant gliomas is rare and supposes a diagnostic challenge. In our series one case was previously diagnosed of lower-grade glioma. Objective: With prenatal vitamin C deprivation and the consequential disturbance in collagen synthesis we couse pial basal membrane rupture and the sequential development of dysplastic changes in the cerebellar cortex. In this study we investigated postnatal differentiation of prenatal caused neuronal migration defect. Method: The experiment included 20 guiena pig 1 year old. First group of animals (10) was control and second was experimental (10) wich was during prenatal life (from 10th to 50th intrauterine day) deprived for vitamin C. We analyse vermal region of cerebellum using neuronal (NeuN, calbindin, synaptophysin), glial (MBP, pTTT, S100 and GFAP) and structural (collagen IV, CD34) immunohistochemical markers. Results: In analysis of dysplastic cerebellar cortex neronal immunohistochemical marker show high morphological disturbance in final Purkinje cell development (calbindin) and complete maturation in ectopic granule cells (NeuN, synaptophysin). Using glial markers we show alteration in gliogenesis and myelination (pTTT, S100, MBP). The experiment showed that although the granular cells located in ectopic medium and Purkinje cells lose polarity they can properly differentiate and mature. The fact that neither humans nor guinea pigs are able to synthesize vitamin C, this animal model creates an new view in understanding of pathogenesis of neuronal migration disorder in humans. Objective: Metastasis is the most common type of brain tumour while primary squamous cell carcinoma is exceedingly rare. We present a case of primary squamous cell carcinoma arising from pre-existing dermoid cyst in a 48-year-old lady who has a cystic lesion with "atypical features" in posterior fossa in pre-operative imaging studies. Method: We examine small biopsy tissue at frozen section and subsequent resection specimen. Results: Islands of atypical squamous cells with focal "less atypical" squamous epithelium and inconspicuous mitotic activity are seen at frozen section. Over 90 % of the tissue by area shows islands of atypical squamous cells in focal desmoplastic or fibrotic stroma. Rare small foci of benign-looking epidermal lining with associated sebaceous glands and hair in transition to squamous dysplasia and invasive carcinoma are identified after histologic examination of the whole specimen. Conclusion: Extensive sampling, preoperative imaging and intraoperative findings remain key for the accurate diagnosis and subsequent management. Method: Retrospective review of 13 patients diagnosed with primary brain lymphoma, between 1993 and 2014. Results: All the patients were immunocompetent. The mean age at diagnosis was 54.1 years. The sex-ratio was 2.5. Ten patients presented with a single lesion and 3 with 2 to 3 lesions. Six tumours (46.2 %) were located in the left hemisphere and 5 (38.5 %) in the right one. The remaining two cases were respectively bilateral and median involving the sella turcica. Diagnosis was performed following craniotomy in 9 cases (76.9 %) and after stereotactic biopsy in 3 cases (23. Objective: Glioblastomas (GBM) which are the most common and highly agressive malignancy amoung in adult primary central nervous tumours. The surgical resection, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy with temozolomide are standart therautic modalities for GBM. Despite the development in the treatment of GBM, the prognosis still remains poor and the majority of the patients relapse soon after the treatment. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway plays an important role in cancer progression. Dysregulation of the PI3K/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway occurs frequently in some cancers, including GBM. In this study, we have aimed to determine the frequency of PIK3CA (codon 540-546 in exon 9 and codon 1042-1049 in exon 20) gene mutations in 25 GBM patients. Method: In this study 25 GBM patients which were diagnosed histopathologically were studied geneticaly by using pyrosequence method. Results: Amoung the patients in this study one patient found to have E545K mutation in exon 9 were detected. Conclusion: Though further investigation is required, therapeutics targeting the PI3K/mTOR pathway may be beneficial for GBMs. Objective: Coronary involvement in IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) has been scarcely reported, and myocardial ischemia as its presenting feature is even rarer. Here, we describe an additional case with novel and relevant observations. Method: Patient's clinical, radiological and pathological data were retrievew and gather to present this rara case. Results: The patient was a previously healthy, middle-aged woman who presented to the clinic with new-onset typical angina. One tumefactive lesion encasing the left anterior descending artery was found during her work-up. The most common underlying malignancies with secondary cardiac involvement were rationally ruled out. Symptoms persisted despite medical treatment and she was therefore referred to surgery. Tumour excision was successfully performed and she received coronary bypass grafting. IgG4-related coronary arteritis with pseudotumour formation was subsequently diagnosed following the comprehensive diagnostic criteria. This condition was clinically classified as active and circulating plasmablasts were found to be increased (5480/mL), even when these were determined 38 days after surgery. A PET/CT revealed an additional hypermetabolic lymph node. She was therefore treated with rituximab as induction therapy (two 1000 mg doses, administered 15 days apart). Three months later, her disease remained clinically inactive. Circulating plasmablasts were repeated and these had dropped to 0/mL. Conclusion: We lastly suggest that IgG4-RD should be part of the differential diagnosis of any patient with tumefactive lesions surrounding the coronary arteries, since it can initially presented as sudden cardiac death. Introducing a 3D software in the educational process at the Department of Pathology A. Sapargaliyeva * , A. Mukushev, O. Zairatyants, A. Popov, G. Mambetova * Kazakh National Medical University, Dept. of Pathology, Almaty, Kazakhstan Objective: Pathology represents a serious challenge for undergraduate students who start learning this subject during the second year of their education. To understand a level of comprehension of the subject we introduced a 3D interactive application that allowed students to 'play' with a pathological process in question. Method: We introduced a program during a practical session on heart and blood vessel disorders at the AMU. The participants were asked to model transmural myocardial infarction and then to select histological slides that corresponded to the pathology. During the 'modeling' stage, students received an opportunity to assess the surface of the organ, to investigate its cut surface, to look at the organ under different angles. At the end of the task the program evaluated the students. After this session, we asked 32 students and 8 instructors of the AMU to fill in a questionnaire to assess the software and their own interaction with it. Results: Both instructors and students mentioned that the program could represent an alternative to the written or oral classroom test, as well as a tool that allows to prepare for the pathology seminar. Students found the first part of the test more challenging compared to the second part. According to the students, modeling of the pathological process allows to visualise it. Conclusion: Diversity of pathological processes allows to individualise and to objectify the system of assessment. Moreover, from our point of view development of such tools allows to work with a new generation of students, who use new technologies in their everyday life. Virchows Arch (2016) 469 (Suppl 1):S1-S346 S181 Conclusion: Clinical diagnosis alone is insufficient in achieving sensitive and accurate diagnosis. The post-mortem autopsy is useful in the audit of contemporary medical practice in low resource settings. Immunohistochemical features of inflammatory mechanisms in core and peri-ischemic area after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rat brain E. Horvath * , A. Hutanu * UMF Targu Mures, Pathology, Romania Objective: The aim of this experimental study was to establish the immunophenotype of inflammatory cells involved in focal cerebral ischemia and reperfusion. Method: Six adult Wistar male rats were included in our study, divided randomly in two groups, control (n = 3) and ischemic (n = 3). In the ischemic group transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced by intraluminal filament technique, obstruction of the left MCA for 90 min, followed by gently removing the filaments. Subjects were sacrificed after 24 h to assess morphological and molecular changes. The distribution of neuronal damage was evaluated with Nissl stain. Immunohistochemistry was performed using leukocytes markers (MPO, Neutrophil elastase, CD68, CD3,CD4, CD8), their released cytokines (MMP 9 and MMP 8) and FXIII (involved in macrophages activation). Positive cells were quantified using digital morphometry. Results: Postischemic resident microglial cells are activated after ischemia along with a large number of leukocytes, neutrophils being the first blood-derived leukocytes. CD3 positive T-cells were present in low numbers in peri-ischemic area in association with MMP 9/MMP 8 macrophages, some of them with the expression of FXIII. Conclusion: The inflammatory responses to ischemia are activation of microglial cells and accumulation of circulatory inflammatory cells. Objective: Tuberculous aneurysm of the cerebral artery is exceptional and exposes patients to a very high risk of unpredictable rupture. Method: We report an autopsy case of 33-year-old male who was hospitalized for a therapy of endocarditis associated to pulmonary tuberculosis who dead suddenly. Results: An autopsy was performed showed endocardiac vegetation, pulmonary abscess, and an edematous brain with fresh massive hemorrhage in the basal ganglia. The dissection of the Willis circle showed a ruptured aneurysm of the posterior communicating artery. A microscopic examination was performed showed tuberculosis lesion of the heart, the lung and the spleen with granulomatous lesion associated to caseation necrosis. The histological study of the brain confirms those found with the unaided eye and show several lacunars infracts in the cerebral parenchyma. The walls of the cerebral arteries are infiltrated by granulation tissue associated to a caseation necrosis and show a discontinuity of the arterial wall compatible with an aneurismal ruptured due to a tuberculosis infiltration. Conclusion: By our case we illustrate a rare fatal manifestation of tuberculosis and we underline the role of autopsy in explaining such rare threatening mechanism of some well known disease. Objective: Pathological routine protocols provide resection margin ink marking for orientation during microscopy. Diverse resection margins of one tissue specimen require diverse ink colors. The distinct discrimination between the colours is crucial for subsequent therapeutically regimes. In some cases, for example assessment of tumour residuals close to the resection margin, adjacent immunohistochemistry analyses are necessary. Here we describe color changings in the resection margin ink markings after immunohistological stainings. Method: Two resection specimen were color ink marked using red, blue, green, black and blue colour and TippEx. Tissue processing was performed using a classical processing system with ascending and descending Ethanol and Xylol sequences, one using a vacuum and one using a microwave based processing system. Next, all series were cut into 2 μm thick slices and routine immunohistochemistry was performed. Results: Except for the blue color, all markings were equal for paint marking color and intensity, independent from the processing regime and used antibody. Conclusion: TRS is a common pediatric surgical problem, which is unrecognized by many pathologists. There is a theoretical risk of malignant transformation in the long term. When blind-ending spermatic cord without viable testis is submitted for tissue analysis, it is imperative to characterize such cases as consistent with regressed testis which obviates further surgical intervention. Morphometric analysis of duodenum in human fetus K. Erdogan * , S. Karabag, P. Alsancak, N. Soygun, F. Doran * Cukurova University, Dept. of Pathology, Adana, Turkey Objective: The mucosa of duodenum is lined by finger-like villi. In adults, the villus-to-crypt height ratio is about 4 to 5:1. The aim of this study is to evaluate the villus-to-crypt ratio in human fetus. Method: This study was carried out 81 human fetuses. Three random villi were measured with the X and Y axis. The statistical analysis was performed by T-Test and One-way Anova test in SPSS 13.0. Results: There were 29 female and 52 male fetuses and the age range between 12 and 40 weeks of gestation. The mean villus to crypt ratio was 2,75; 3,21; 3,76 in the first, second and third trimesters, respectively. Although the villus to crypt ratio increases with trimesters correspondingly, the correlation of this ratio for trimesters were not statistically significant (p = 0,376). Conclusion: In our study, we found that villi are blunter and shorter than in adults but not in children regardless of gestational weeks. The villi are elongated gradually after birth. It is concluded that enviromental factors may be affect elongation of villi after birth. The Method: Placentas from pregnancies complicated with circulatory hypoxia due to maternal congenital heart disease (CHD) were studied by naked eye and tissue samples were taken from various regions. Then histological slides, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, were studied microscopically and with computer morphometry. All material was divided into three groups: I-20 cases of CHD without surgical correction; II-19 placentas with surgical correction of CHD and 15 cases of uncomplicated pregnancy (control group-CG). I. Data were analyzed using statistical methods. Differences between groups were evaluated with the help of non-parametric test of Wald-Wolfowitz. The following format of the description of data was used Me (QR), where Me-median; QR-the interquartile range. Reliability established at p < 0.05. Objective: Peripheral T cell lymphoma, NOS, is a wide and heterogeneous category of mature T cell lymphomas that is a diagnosis of exclusion. It represents 30 % of peripheral T cell tumours, affecting mostly adults and rare in children. Method: Five years-old male child, febrile with 2 weeks evolution under antibiotic, presented with pain, abdominal distension, liver cytolysis and failure, without encephalopathy and with hepatomegaly and ascitesclinically a Budd-Chiary syndrome. Results: Liver biopsy showed massive sinusoidal infiltration with obliteration, and lesser portal involvement, by a lymphoma composed of small and round cells diffusely positive for CD3, CD5, CD2, CD7, CD8, CD56, and CD99; EBER in situ hybridization was negative. The tumour morphologic and immunohistochemical profile does not fit into any of the WHO specific lymphoma categories, allowing the diagnosis of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, NOS (confirmed by two international experts). There was general condition deterioration with evolution for multiple organ failure and death. Autopsy study showed massive organic infiltration by T-cell lymphoma. The diagnosis of non-Hodgkin lymphoma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a patient with large hepatomegaly presenting clinically as Budd-Chiary syndrome. Liver biopsy, promptly performed, is a safe and accurate tool to achieve the correct diagnosis and guide patient management. Objective: Salivary gland anlage tumour (SGAT) is a rare benign tumour, with only a few cases being reported in literature. This tumour is composed of mixed epithelial and mesenchymal elements and it recapitulates the early stages in the embryology of the salivary gland between the 4th and 8th weeks of development. To report a rare case of salivary gland anlage tumour (SGAT), review the histological features, immunohistochemical studies and review the literature. Method: Medical records, radiologic studies, and pathologic report were reviewed. Results: The patient is a 15 day old neonate who presented with nasopharyngeal mass and respiratory distress at birth. CT scan of head was performed which suggested a vascular tumour. MRI revealed a non vascular mass in the nasopharynx. Operative findings showed a huge mass attached to the posterior part of the septum and obstructing both choanae and extending into the right nasal cavity. The mass was removed and histopathology with immunohistochemical studies confirmed a diagnosis of salivary gland anlage tumour. Conclusion: Salivary gland anlage tumour of the nasopharynx is a rare cause of neonatal airway obstruction. Recognition of SGAT is important because simple excision of the lesion achieves cure. Objective: Wilson's disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disease with an incidence of 1/30.000, rarely symptomatic in children, that should be excluded in acute or chronic liver disease, of unknown etiology. Histopathology of WD is not specific, especially in early stages, making the differential diagnosis a challenge. Method: Histopathology review of liver biopsies of paediatric patients diagnosed with WD within 2000-2014-12 biopsies. Results: 9 cases (7F:2M), with median of age 10 (4-15), median biopsy size 12 mm (10-17 mm) and median number of portal tracts 7 (3-17). Clinically, 5 presented with aminotransferase elevation, 2 as acute liver failure, 1 with portal hypertension and 1 with cholestatic hepatitis. Morphologically the more frequent findings were fibrosis, hepatocellular ballooning and portal tract inflammation (75 %), glicogenated nuclei (58,3 %), interface hepatitis and macrovacuolar steatosis (50 %), billirubinostasis (33 %), mild necrosis and ductular reaction (25 %) and Mallory-Denk bodies (17 %). 5 cases (42 %) were positive for rhodanine/Shikata techniques. The morphologic spectrum is wide and non-specific in WD and the absence of histochemical staining in more than half of the cases should not invalidate WD diagnosis. A high suspicion is necessary, especially since it is a treatable disease, where delay in the diagnosis may lead to a bad prognosis. Extracellular matrix in human placenta R. Gopalan * * Srivenkate Swaradental College, Dept. of Pathology, Chennai, India Objective: The maintenance of uterine placental attachment during pregnancy depends on the adhesive interactions between cytotrophoblasts and the extracellular matrix (ECM). The aim of the study is to localise the ECM components,CollagenIV and Fibronectin(FN) in the placenta of normal and abnormal deliveries. Method: Formalin fixed and paraffin embedded material from placenta were studied:mothers with intra uterine growth retardation(IUGR baby)20,neonates with congenital anomalies(8)and normal deliveries (14) . Haematoxylin and Eosin staining was done. LSABtechnique with two primary antibodies:mouse monoclonal antihuman collagenIV(DAKO) and rabbit antihuman Fibronectin(dako) in dilutions of1:30 and 1:20 were used. Pressure cooking was done to unmask the antigen. AEC was used as chromogen and Gill's hematoxylin was used as nuclear counterstain. Results: Thickening of BM was seen in placentas of IUGR neonates whose mothers had pregnancy induced hypertension. Objective: The expression of androgen receptors (AR) in the Morgagni hydatid has been suggested to play a role in the process of testicular descent. There are controversial reports though, concerning their presence in cryptorchidism, which may also be age-and puberty-related. Method: Fifty-seven testicular Morgagni hydatids were collected prospectively, 36 from cryptorchid testes (CrT) and 21 from control group/ hydrocele cases (CG). All the children were pre-pubertal ranging from 3 months to 9 years of age. The expression of AR and ER was examined by immunohistochemistry and assessed by the Allred score. Statistical analysis was performed using Mann-Whitney test and Spearman's rho. Results: In CrT, ER expression was lower than in CG (p = 0.028), and correlated with AR expression (p < 0.001); AR expression, although lower in CrT, did not significantly differ; expression of ER correlates with AR (p < 0.001). In CG, but not in CrT, size correlates with AR expression (p < 0.001) and marginally with ER expression (p = 0.054). Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the immunohistochemical expression of Ki67 and p53 and their correlation with histological subtypes of medulloblastoma. Method: 20 pediatric medulloblastoma cases diagnosed in Latvia from 2000 till 2015 were analyzed immunohistochemically by counting Ki67 and p53 positive tumour cells in the highest staining region (magnification 400). Comparison between the histological subtypes was calculated by the independent sample t-test (p ≤ 0, 05). Results: The average Ki67 proliferation index in whole medulloblastoma group was 36,81 %, in classic medulloblastoma group (n = 15) 37,43 % in nodular/desmoplastic tumour group-(n = 3) 23,98 %; SD, in anaplastic tumours-(n = 2) 51,4 %. The average of p53 positive cells in whole medulloblastoma group was 11,74 %, in classic medulloblastoma group 12,34 %, in nodular/desmoplastic tumour group 11,80 %; in anaplastic tumours 7,10 %. The diferences of both Ki67 and p53expression between classic and nodular/desmoplastic tumour groups were not statistically significant (p = 23; p = 0,94). The differences between both markers expression in anaplastic and nodular/desmoplastic tumour and anaplastic and classical tumours were not statistically significant, respectively p = 0,12; p = 0,32; p = 0,60; p = 0,61. Conclusion: As the differences of Ki67 and p53 protein expression of different subtypes of medulloblastoma was not statistically significant, it should not be taken in consideration during the assessment of histological subtypes. Results: Among 1004 perinatal autopsy cases 90 (9 %) cases had congenital urinary system malformations. In this group 35 cases (38.9 %) were female and 55 cases (61.1 %) were male. Among these cases with congenital urinary sytem malformation 60 cases (65.9 %) had at least one associated anomaly. Most common associated anomaly was dismorphic findings (47.8 %). And it is followed by skeletal dysplasias and lung malformations with a percentage of 27.8 %. And neural tube defects are also common associated anomaly (10 %). Conclusion: Congenital urinary malformations are classified as renal abnormalities of renal mass, abnormalities of renal position-form, congenital anomalies of upper urinary tract, abnormal renal differentiation. Renal cystic disease is an important group of congenital urinary system malformations which is included in abnormal renal differentiation. Diagnosis of renal pathology should be given clearly because some may be hereditary or associated with other anomalies and be a component of a syndrome. For genetic counseling and clinical follow-up perinatal autopsy keeps its importance. MMPs-2/9 and TIMP-2 expression in infantile hemangiomas on propranolol therapy J. Kobos * , P. Przewratil, K. Taran, A. Wnek, E. Andrzejewska * Medical University of Lódz, Dept. of Pediatric Pathology, Poland Objective: Propranolol is widely known beta-blocker approved for treating infantile hemangiomas (IHs). The mechanisms of spectacular results of performed propranolol treatment remain unclear. There is suspected that propranolol may influence metalloproteinases (MMPs) expression. The aim of the study was to perform an evaluation of MMPs-2/9 and TIMP-2 in IHs to find their relation to unusual tumour biology and systemic propranolol treatment. Method: MMPs-2/9 and TIMP-2 were analyzed in 71 IHs tissues with the use of immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR and in 50 serum samples of IHs' patients by an ELISA assay. Results: There were significantly lower MMPs-2/9 and higher TIMP-2 levels in IHs' tissues on mRNA level as well as lower serum MMP-2 concentration among the treated individuals. Conclusion: Obtained results pointed that MMPs-2/9 and TIMP-2 both are involved in natural IHs' biology and propranolol pathways covering its antiangiogenic properties. The most reliable method of IHs examination appears to be direct tissue assessment on molecular level, however MMP-2 evaluation in patients' serum may also benefits in clinical practice in doubtful cases. Expressions of neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin and kidney injury molecule- Objective: AT-rich interacting domain 1 Alpha (ARID-1A) is a subunit of chromatin remodeler Switch/ Sucrose Non-Fermentable (SWI/SNF) complex. It is involved in several important cellular processes such as differentiation, regulation of cell cycle and restoration of DNA damage. Although higher mutation rate of ARID-1A is strongly determined in several human cancers, its significance has not been fully established in Wilms tumour (WT). The aim of this study was to determine the prognostic value of ARID-1A expression in WT. Method: The nuclear ARID-1A expression in tissue samples of 50 Wilms Tumours and its relationship with prognostic parameters were evaluated. Results: Twenty-three (46 %) of the cases were male while 27 (54 %) were female. The mean age was found to be 3.26 ± 2 years. The average tumour size was 9.16 ± 2.9 cm in diameter and the average weight of kidney was 478 ± 312 g. Thirteen (26 %) cases were stage I, 18 (36 %) cases were stage II, 7 (14 %) cases were stage III, 6 (12 %) cases were stage IV. Thirty-nine cases were alive (78 %), while 11 cases (22 %) were deceased. Mean overall survival time was 68.2 ± 39.5 (2-148) months. ARID-1A expression was normal in most tumours, while was decreased or negative in 14 tumours (28 %). Statistically, ARID-1A expression was found to be correlated with the weight of the tumour (p = 0.002) and survival (p = 0.021). Conclusion: This study indicates that ARID-1A expression may be associated with development of Wilms Tumour. However further studies are needed to clarify the importance of this relevance. Objective: Congenital malignant melanoma (CMM) is an exceedingly rare diagnosis. These cases arise either from transplacental metastatic melanomas or Giant Congenital Melanocytic Naevus or de novo. Method: We received slides and blocks from a neonate who presented with a large periorbital ulcertated tumour. CCM was diagnosed on routine histology and confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, we received a skin biopsy of a rash, a bone marrow biopsy and ocular contents all showing metastatic disease. We performed molecular testing on paraffin blocks of the primary lesion looking for Braf, cKit, Nras, Kras, Egfr and GNAQ and GNA11 mutations. Results: Primary lesion revealed an undifferentiated tumour which was positive for the MelanA and HMB45 and S100. It was tested Braf (exons 11,15), cKit (exons 9,11,13,17), Nras (exons 1,2), Kras (codon 12,13), Egfr (exons 18,19,21) and GNAQ and GNA11. Only a mutation in codon 209 of the GNAQ gene was identified. Conclusion: This boy is now 4 ½ years old and developing well with stable disease. He is treated with a weekly dose of 5 % Diphencyprone. Extensive molecular testing was undertaken. Only a partial deletion of chromosome 3p and a mutation in codon 209 of the GNAQ gene were identified which are typical in uveal melanomas. Conclusion: This is a primary primitive neuroectodermal tumour of the kidney with ganglionic EWSR1 metastastasis and gene translocation, due to the low incidence it is important to describe the proper handling and include it in the differential diagnosis when the mass of kidney is addressed. Objective: Drawings and paintings of the human body and its anatomical components goes back to primitive civilizations. First as scenes of daily life, after as art and afterwards as science. Through the history of mankind, many are the worldwide renowned illustrations. The authors intend to explore the "Heart & Vessels Illustrations" in a World Heritage Museum. Method: The XIIIth century Coimbra University was classified World Heritage by UNESCO in 2013 and within it, the Medical School Pathology Museum. FMUC's Pathology Museum dates from the XIXth century; occupies a 500 m2 area and gathers 3000 pieces (fixed and dehydrated pathological specimens, wax models, ancient books and pictures). The authors examined the gross macroscopy and the microscopic old atlas and compendia. Results: Water-coloured and black-and-white macroscopic and histological illustrations of heart and vessels diseases from the XIXth century were found. Conclusion: These drawings and paintings not only are a priceless heritage of the combination of "art and science" for future generations, but also an up-to-date teaching tools, due to the similarity to pathology found at the present time. PS-20-002 Actinic keratosis, historical aspects of an actual but still controversial nosological entity C. Cacchi * , R. Knüchel-Clarke * Objective: Recapitulate the history of the term actinic keratosis (AK) as mile stone to elucidate the concept of a precancerous lesion. Method: We review the literature examining the definitions and the clinic-pathological correlation that this entity has received in the past. We also presented the most diffused recently proposed classification of AK. Results: The first description of AK was formulated by Duheruilh in 1896 (keratosis senilis). He found evidence that keratosis senilis is prone to evolve into invasive squamous carcinoma of the skin. In 1926 W. Freudenthal defined the histological aspects of keratosis senilis (KS), distinguished it from "Verruca senilis" also known as seborrheic keratosis. RI Sutton (1938) believed that this lesion is de facto a cancerous entity and not a pre-neoplasia. This according with Lever (1949) and others; he found that in certain age periods, not all histologic elements develop evenly, that there is a certain predominance in the development of that one, the other entities, the explanation of which lies in the alternation of stages of differentiation and growth stages of histological elements, thus it was established phenomenon diskhroniya development intraorgan structures; his work has shown that humanity in its structure is fragmented, concluded: "The considerations made on basis of experimental data lead us to an extremely important and highly interesting conclusion. Cultural race of mankind, such as Europeans have a more complex structure of protein molecule than inferior races. Thus, biological, or rather, a biochemical point of view, they are more difficult to organize than latter "; he denied almost famous postulate that all men -brothers; developed a classification of types of human constitution, which was reason for his political persecution in connection with which work had to be stopped, however, this did not stop wrath of his enemies; author of over 300 scientific papers, including 24 monographs, related to study of child age morphology and tuberculosis; features: fluent in five languages, unusual diligence, real love for science, almost never used vacation; interest in philosophy and poetry; committed suicide Oct. 3, 1945 in Moscow on 52th year of life. The history of textbooks on pathology and pathological anatomy for teaching in Russian Empire, USSR and Russian Federation T. Pavlova * , A. Nesterov * Belgorod State National University, Dept. of Pathology, Russia Objective: The formation of textbooks is connected directly with history of the state. Method: The textbooks of museum of pathologies' chair of Belgorod State National Research university. Results: In the end of XIX century and in the beginning of XX century textbooks, issued in other countries, were often used in medical institutes in spite of teaching, conducted on Russian language. Books on pathological anatomy, issued on German language were on the first place. Thus, the textbook "Pathologische Anatomia"(1913) by Ludwig Fschaff was recommended in St.Petersburg and in Moscow. In 30s the significant number of books of scientists of Russian school of pathology was published. The book of Nikiforov and Abrikosov "The basis of pathological anatomy" (1928) should be noted. The monopolization of separate schools for issuing of students' manuals and the publishing of uniform textbook on pathological anatomy occurred in USSR in period of 70s-90s of XX century. Nowadays in Russian Federation teaching of pathology and pathological anatomy is carried out in dependence from specialty with extended number of textbooks. The qualitative atlases are issued. Such textbooks as "Anderson's Pathology" are used for teaching. Objective: Digital Pathology (DP) introduces changes in the traditional work of pathologists. An important issue is the image handling from an ergonomic point of view to avoid work-related musculoskeletal disorders (MSD). The aim of this study was to investigate a proper input device (ID) for DP. Method: Research included two phases: 1. Eight medical students analyzed 11 IDs (figure 1), with the ImageViewer software and the web-based Fitts'-law-test to objectify accuracy. A questionnaire with ergonomic topics was included. 2. Evaluation by two experienced pathologists the best rated ID and comparison with a voice recognition system (VRS), using a headset microphone and rating perceived workload using NASA Task-Load-Index with 28 digitized preparations. Digital-Image-Hub with a 4-MegaPixel-display were used. Results: Correlation between technical aspects of the evaluated devices and accuracy (Fitts'-law-test), and comfort with overall satisfaction existed (p < 0.05). The assessment concluded that vertical mouse was the best rated ID. However, it has a slightly higher perceived workload in comparison with VRS, which was the proper controller for DP in this study. We describe a methodology that can study and compare IDs for future workstations in DP. VRS can function as a good handsfree device for DP and could be considered in physical disability situations. Remote teaching of histopathology using scanned slides via skype® between the UK and Nigeria Objective: Web based learning is a major component of distance education. We explore its applications for pathology teaching in resource limited sub-Saharan Africa. Method: The participants were consultant pathologists and trainees drawn from tertiary institutions in Nigeria. They viewed the digital slides via the Leeds virtual pathology website following which interactive lectures were given via Skype®. Questionnaires were administered via SurveyMonkey® to all participants of 12 sessions between 2014 and 2015. Results: Nine consultant pathologists and 32 trainees participated in this survey. Twenty-nine (69 %) of the respondents thought it was fairly easy to navigate the system, 11 (26.2 %) thought it was easy while 2 (4.8 %) felt it was difficult. Twenty-six (61.9 %) respondents found it fairly easy to make a make a diagnosis, 13 (31 %) thought it was easy, while three (7.1 %) noted that it was difficult. Twenty-four (57.1 %) respondents had a fairly smooth user experience, 12 (28.6 %) experienced occasional crashes while six (14. 3 %) reported a smooth experience. Almost all (97.6 %) of the respondents felt the pathology teaching was beneficial to their local pathology practice and all indicated the need for more of such sessions. Conclusion: The beneficial applications of internet based lectures make it a viable cheaper, faster and cost effective alternative to face-to-face lectures in delivering education to resource-limited countries. Objective: Turn-around time (TAT) in pathology is a key performance indicator, but TAT methodology is rarely a focus in the literature. TAT follows non-normally distributed (right skewed) pattern, requiring transformation or use of a semi-parametric approach;. mean TAT cannot not be used in such settings. The aim of this study is to apply survival analysis (time to event analysis) to TAT monitoring. Method: We extracted TAT data (2010-2014) for all breast core biopsies processed in our department (n = 4,118), time of accessioning and time of sign-out for each case. There were no censored cases. We built a histogram and ran Kaplan-Meier analysis, using 1-minus-survival (time to task completion) plot, and stratified the data by the calendar year and complexity. Log-rank test was used to compare the differences in TAT between calendar years and complexity codes. Results: The model fits proportional hazard assumption. The TAT displays non-normal right-skewed distribution. The Kaplan-Meier curves show notable similarity over the years, with a small yet statistically significant difference in TAT over the years (log rank test, p < 0.0001, from median 4.3 (95%CI 4.1-4.6) days in 2010 to 3.8 (95%CI 3.4-4.2) days in 2014) and are dependent on case complexity. Conclusion: Kaplan-Meier (time to event) analysis is a robust method of monitoring TAT in anatomical pathology. It is more informative than point estimates of mean and median TAT. Furthermore, it is potentially applicable to monitoring of individual pathologist turn-around time and allows for multivariate adjustment to case complexity, daily workload, and use of ancillary methods. Evaluation of Ki-67 Index in invasive breast cancer: Comparison between visual and automated digital assessment E. Ayad * * Cairo University, Dept. of Pathology, Giza, Egypt Objective: The reliability of the established Ki67 scoring is limited due to lack of standardization of methods used for assessment of the Ki67 value. Digital pathology is currently suggested to be a potential solution to Ki67 assessment problems. Method: A retrospective & prospective study including 100 patients diagnosed with invasive breast cancer. Three senior pathologists have been asked to estimate the Ki67 proliferative index for each of the 100 cases by examining the glass slides by optical microscope and the virtual slides on the monitor and providing a percentage score of tumour cells with positive staining then a categorical score 'high' and 'low' Ki67 score using 14 & 20 % as threshold indicatives of high ki67 status. Finally, a digital quantitative assessment of Ki67 was performed. Results: A high inter-observer agreement was found when using optical microscopy slides as well as virtual slides for ki67 assessment, with slightly higher Correlation coefficient values when using optical microscopy. Ki67 values were linearly correlated with automated evaluation of Ki67. When using categorical scores, a statistically significant difference between the overall results of 3 observers on virtual slides and automated assessment of Ki67. Conclusion: Digital pathology can be considered as a potential easy-to use tool for a robust and standardized fully automated Ki67 scoring. Objective: Smartphone applications (apps) have become increasingly prevalent in medicine. GP-HELPER is a novel app developed as a reference tool in general pathology, developed for Android and iOS platforms. Method: "GP-HELPER," was created using Mobincube website platform. This tool also integrates "FORUM GP-HELPER," an external website created using Miarroba website (http://forum-gp-helper. mboards.com) and "COMMUNITY GP-HELPER" a multichannel chat created using Chatango website platform. Results: The application was released in July 2015, and it is been periodically updated since then. The app has permanent information about different pathology and a database with more than 5000 immunohistochemistry results from different tumours. Online data have links to more than 1100 reference pathology video lectures, 250 antibodies information, more than 70 pathology association websites, 46 pathology providers, and 78 outstanding pathology journal websites. The app has two interactive places that let users to stay in touch everywhere and every time. Expert consult section is also available. Conclusion: "GP-HELPER" pretends to integrate offline and online data about pathology with two interactive external places in order to represent a reference tool for general pathologists and associate members. Evaluation of an automated tissue-sectioning system for paraffin blocks towards clinical implementation as a part of digital pathology workflow Y. Yagi * , X. Fu, P. Bautista, V. Klepeis * Harvard Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Boston, USA Objective: Slide quality plays an important role in digital pathology and is an important consideration when using whole slide images (WSI) in clinical diagnosis. We have adopted an automated tissue sectioning system (ATSS) for WSI/digital imaging research because of consistency of tissue thickness and quality. Use of ATSS in clinical settings is limited by type of paraffin, inefficient block trimming and facing, and lack of LIS integration. The latest ATSS has attempted to overcome some technical limitations. In this study, we evaluate whether the ATSS can section clinical standard paraffin blocks at a quality sufficient for diagnostic purposes. Method: 110 paraffin blocks used previously for diagnostic purposes were sectioned using the AS-410 (Dainippon Seiki, Co. LTD., Japan) at 5um thickness. Nine organs were represented. 1500 slides were sectioned and evaluated manually. One-third of slides were stained with H&E and evaluated for section quality by both microscope and digitally. Results: Satisfactory sections were obtained from most blocks. In particular, sections obtained from lung and breast excisions were of high quality. A moderate number of small biopsies and bone displayed holes or tissue distortions. A small percentage of gastroinstestinal tissue sections showed mild-moderate tissue artifacts. Objective: Delivering cancer care in low-resource settings is dependent on developing efficient and accurate pathology systems. In this study, we analyzed the efficacy of implementing a telepathology system to remotely provide cancer diagnostics to Butaro District Hospital in rural Rwanda. Method: Our system consisted of static images obtained by histotechnologists using a standard protocol, uploaded to ipathnetwork.com, and reviewed by a team of pathologists with various areas of expertise in common malignancies. Over the 9-month implementation of telepatholgy, we divided the study into three segments-training, technical workflow, and testing segment. In this presentation, we will breakdown the efficacy of the telepathology system in Butaro District Hospital for oncology cases. Results: For the three implementation phases over the 9-month study period, we will present the turn-around time, from procedure date to result, as well as the volume of cases triaged for pathologist review that were unable to be diagnosed through telepathology. Conclusion: Over the three implementation phases, the turn-around time of cases drastically decreased, allowing clinicians to receive results and initiate more accurate and timely treatment for cancer patients. Simultaneously, the percentage of cases triaged for pathologist review that could not be properly diagnosed through telepathology significantly decreased through improvements in technical imaging, communication, and workflow management. Objective: To indicate the importance of collecting rare cases and their expert assessment with the help of digital microscopy. Method: Fourteen rare cases from different sub-specializations field in pathology were selected by two expert pathologists from the Czech Republic and Italy. The slides were digitized and introduced with clinical information to 250 specialists registered to take part in the competition. Results: The range of the right answers varies between 3 and 56 %. The most difficult case for the participants was the one with no tumourous pathology: ectopic hamartomatous thymoma. There were 3 % of full match. The biggest number of full match to experts' diagnoses can be seen in the cases with soft tissues tumours. To analyze the disagreements we divided them in two groups: MAYOR Disagreement-potentially wrong histological diagnosis changes the clinical tactics of patient's treatment. Potentially wrong pathological diagnosis leads to wrong course of patient's treatment and wrong chemotherapy, etc. MINOR Disagreement-potentially wrong diagnosis doesn't have any clinical matter. This tactic showed that the case of hyalinized endometrioid adenocarcinoma turned out to be the most difficult one for the participants. The range of MAYOR Disagreement here is 66 %, while the full match is 14 %. Conclusion: Rare cases show very low reproducibility index. The digital microscopy is a good way not only to spread the information (education and training) but also to collect the data about difficult and rare cases. Compared to rare cases large data samples are better for reproducibility researches. Analysis of the impact and value of a specimen tracking and routing system implementation for anatomic pathology J. M. Tuthill * * Henry Ford Health System, Pathology, Detroit, USA Objective: Accurate and effective specimen tracking and routing in a surgical pathology laboratory is critical for improving efficiency, reducing error, and improving patient care. Performing specimen tracking and routing in the traditional manner could cost significant time and resources, with minimal to no, real-time workflow monitoring. Method: Sunquest CoPath, as the laboratory information stystem, integrated with specimen management routing and tracking. Additional hardware requirements include Windows based workstations, 2-D barcode scanners, slide label and cassette printers/etchers, and network. Results: An automated tracking and routing system was successfully implemented with the necessary hardware and software. Compared to our current laboratory information system, CoPath+SMART provided more accurate routing, detailed tracking, and valuable workflow monitoring functions. Conclusion: As the major histology lab for a tertiary regional medical center, the lab benefitted from an automated specimen tracking and routing system. Increased work efficiency, reduced error, and better lab management were achieved. This required changes in laboratory culture, workforce adjustment, and a well-tailored plan to increase benefit/cost ratio. Tumour-associated fibroblasts as generic target of cancer immunotherapy O. Gheorghe-Emilian * , O. Gavriliuc, F. Bojin, V. Paunescu * Timisoara, Romania Objective: The ideal way to study adaptive immunity involves direct detection of endogenous epitope-specific T cells using methods that distinguish TCR specificity by its binding to cognate peptide-MHC complexes. CTLs expressing a particular TCR are able to recognise not only tumour cells antigen but also microenvironment specific antigens, such as those on TAFs. They can be selected by Streptamers®, subsequently analysed and get infused into tumours of patients. Method: We used surgically removed fragments of breast cancer to obtain TAFs, which were further cultivated and expanded in vitro in standard culture conditions. Blood samples were obtained from the same patient, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were obtained by density gradient centrifugation and stored in liquid nitrogen until further use. On the surface of TAFs, we identified by flow-cytometry the presence of a specific antigen-fibroblast activation protein (FAP) and we custom-made MHC I-Strep HLA-A*0201 FAP for isolation of CTLs. Antigen-specific T cell sorting was performed by magnetic nanobeads separation, biotin-binding for removal of magnetic particles, and we performed co-culture of TAFs with positive and negative T cell fractions. Results: After in vitro expansion of PBMCs for 2 weeks, we were able to isolate using Streptamer® technology a proportion of 20 % of CD8+ T cells, specific for the fibroblast activation protein (FAP) antigen. Conclusion: Co-culture of cytotoxic T lymphocytes was performed in a ratio of 1:1 with TAFs. TAFs proliferation in vitro was abolished after 3 days of co-culture with FAP-specific CTLs, compared with non-specific T cells, which induced only decrease in TAFs proliferation after 5 days of co-culture. As our ongoing research on TAFs uncovers novel antigenic targets, the flexibility of the Streptamer technology will allow us to select ever more specific CTLs at the same resource expenditure. The relevance of BRAF exon 11 testing in melanomasingle center experience G. Richtig * , B. Ehall, L. Koch, E. Richtig, G. Winter, S. Eder, K. Kashofer, A. Heinemann, G. Hoefler, A. Aigelsreiter * Medizin. Universität Graz, Inst. für Pharmakologie, Austria Objective: Since the availability of targeted therapy, BRAFV600 mutation testing in metastatic melanoma has become obligatory. A second mutational hotspot for high-activity kinase BRAF mutations is in the exon 11. Method: We performed a retrospective analysis of 145 metastatic melanoma samples that were previously tested for BRAFV600 with next generation sequencing covering the codons 581 to 620 of the BRAF gene (on exon 15). Due to the increasing clinical relevance of mutations in the exon 11 we tested the 145 samples using pyrosequencing covering the codons 464 to 469 of exon 11. Results: 49 (33.8 %) samples were positive for a mutation in the BRAF gene in exon 15. Additionally, four mutations in the BRAF exon 11 could be identified (G466E; 2x S467L; G469E), all in BRAF exon 15 wild type samples. In-vitro experiments suggest that mutations in exon 11 of the BRAF gene respond to targeted therapy, such as MEK inhibitors, and are more sensitive to chemotherapy. Therefore, the mutational spectrum in melanoma other than BRAFV600 might be of clinical relevance in the future and should therefore be included in melanoma mutation analysis panels.  The broad variety of next-generation sequencing methodologies and the impact on biomarker testing V. Tack * , E. Dequeker * Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, BQA, Belgium Objective: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is the next best thing for oncology biomarker testing in molecular diagnostics. A comparative study with different NGS panels and bio-informatics pipelines gives more insight in the efficiency of the panels and the quality control (QC) metrics used in practice. Method: Twenty-six institutes reported on identified variants in 10 patient samples of the ESP EGFR external quality assessment (EQA) and 2 synthetic DNA samples containing more than 300 variants. The raw data is further analysed and used QC metrics are questioned. Objective: Erroneous results in personalized medicine can significantly compromise patient safety. Unfortunately, tumour analyses for metastatic colorectal and non-small cell lung cancer are error-prone. External quality assessment schemes aim to educate laboratories and to monitor their performance. However, no research has yet been conducted on the error distribution, root causes, or the corrections undertaken for molecular diagnostics. Method: An electronic pilot questionnaire was sent to 62 laboratories from 24 countries, with at least one genotyping error during the 2015 ALK/ROS1 scheme of the European Society of Pathology, or with a suboptimal score for the technical evaluation of ALK immunohistochemical staining. Results: Twenty-three of 62 laboratories from 11 countries responded, yielding a total of 31 errors. An equal distribution between pre-, post-and analytical errors was observed for ALK, except for the technical assessment (analytical). Causes were mainly methodological and reagent-based. ROS1 errors were mostly post-analytical/unknown of nature (interpretation errors). Most corrections were protocol revisions (ALK) and staff trainings (ROS1). Remarkably, 20 % of the laboratories did not undertake any action. Conclusion: There seems to be a difference in error distribution and causes between markers. Additional data is required to investigate the variation between techniques or laboratory characteristics in a longitudinal manner. PS-22-008 STD pathogens determined in semen using PCR and flow-through hybridization technology N. Jaffer * , R. Ghani * BMSI -JPMC, Dept. of Pathology, Karachi, Pakistan Objective: The aim of this study was to access in health care facilities for diagnosis and common pathogens of STDs, those causing infertility and Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Mycoplasma hominis. Genital wart is a highly contagious sexually transmitted disease caused by some sub-types of human papillomavirus (HPV). Method: Semen samples were obtained by masturbation into sterile containers after sexual abstinence of 48 to 72 h. Samples were subjected to semen analysis within 1 h of collection and processed for freezing within 2 h of collection. The concentrations of sperm as well as sperm motility were also determined. DNA extraction was extracted of all the samples and the PCR assay was performed. The amplicons are subsequently hybridized to pathogen-specific capturing probes via "Flow-through" hybridization. Results: During our study we came across with the STI pathogens present in our population and the reason for infertility was the main cause. When Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae were detected in their wife's were also screened and these STI pathogens were identified. The main route for the transfer of STI pathogens were the men special those who visited commercial sex workers or hotelbased sex workers as they were working in other cities and the complained for infertility. Screening for bacterial STI pathogens, Mycoplasma hominis, Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae are strongly recommended because these pathogens can cause serious reproductive complications such as pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy. Conclusion: According to these preliminary results, molecular testing for EGFR, KRAS and ALK was suboptimal in The Netherlands. Furthermore, substantial interlaboratory variation was observed, which may have hampered optimal use of and benefit from targeted therapies in a selection of laboratories. To determine whether molecular testing has improved, a more recent cohort will be analyzed as well. Objective: Characterize the role of antitumour vanadium in TGF-beta (β)/Smad signaling, and association with cancer cell proliferation, differentiation, and metastasis. Method: Vanadium compounds were tested in lung cancer adenocarcinoma A549 and aggressive breast epithelial tumour MDA-231 cells for the period 24, 48 and 72 h, using RT-PCR, immunofluorescence and Western blot methods. The experiments showed that vanadium down-regulates the TGF-β signaling pathway by reducing the expression of phosphosmad2, smad 1, 4, PAI-1 and activates the apoptotic process thus leading A549, MDA-231 cells to cell death. In addition, the expression levels of the inhibitory smad7 which inhibits TGF-β activation were raised following vanadium treatment in both cell lines. Furthermore, vanadium suppresses the expression of the cell cycle proteins cyclin D1 protein and E1, involved in cell cycle regulation and development of tumour process and plays an important role in the mechanism of differentiation and growth of cancer cells. Conclusion: Overall, the findings highlight the multifaceted antitumour action of vanadium and its synergistic antitumour efficacy with current chemotherapy drugs, knowledge that could be valuable for targeting cancer cell metabolism and cancer stem cell-mediated metastasis in aggressive chemoresistant tumours. Objective: Identify the molecular mechanism by which vanadium inhibits autophagy and EMT transition through augmentation of TRAILinduced apoptosis in breast epithelial MCF-7 and lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells. Method: Inhibition of autophagy by siRNA or 3-MA and study of TRAIL-mediated apoptosis through DR4 and DR5 protein expression in MCF-7 and A549 cancer cells. Results: Vanadium reduces NF-binding to Becn1 promoter, thereby preventing initiation of autophagy and abnormal proliferation. It was demonstrated that vanadium directly targets autophagosome formation and reduces LC3-I and II expression, both of them important molecules involved in autophagy. The accruing results suggest that inhibition of autophagy by vanadium allows cancer cells to undergo apoptosis, thereby contributing to reduction in cancer cell invasion and metastasis. Conclusion: Collectively, the work a) identifies a biologically active antitumour novel vanadoform containing peroxido and betaine moieties, and b) reveals a crucial role for vanadium in autophagy inhibition, thereby providing new molecular perspective(s) into finely configuring vanadoforms for cancer drug research and therapy. Objective: BRCA1/2 mutation carriers affected with breast and/or ovarian cancer may develop new tumour deposits over time. It is important to know the clonal relationships between multiple tumour localizations, enabling differentiation between multiple primaries or metastatic disease with consequences for therapy and prognosis. We evaluated the value of targeted Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) for determining tumour relatedness. Method: Forty-two female BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with ≥2 tumour localizations were selected. Patients with inconclusive tumour origin after histopathological revision (cases) and with certain tumour origin of ≥3 tumours (controls) were analyzed by targeted NGS. Based on identical or different mutations and/or LOH patterns, tumours were classified as 'multiple primaries' or 'one entity'. Results: Histopathology yielded conclusive results for 38/42 (90 %) patients. Four cases and 10 controls were analyzed by NGS. In 44 tumour samples, 48 mutations were found; 39 (81 %) concerned TP53 mutations. In all 4 cases, the intra-patient clonal relationships between tumour localizations could be unequivocally identified by molecular analysis. In all controls, molecular outcomes matched histopathological results. Conclusion: In most BRCA1/2 mutation carriers with multiple tumours routine histopathology is sufficient to determine tumour origins and relatedness. In case of inconclusive results, molecular analyses can reliably determine clonal relationships between tumours, enabling optimal patient treatment. Method: Using next generation sequencing (NGS), seven inverted papilloma (ISP)-associated SNSCC and their synchronous associated ISP, six non-SNSCC-associated ISP, ten non-ISP-associated SNSCC and four sinonasal adenocarcinomas were analyzed. Results: Activating EGFR mutations were detected in 75 % of SNSCCassociated ISP (and corresponding SNSCC) and in 83 % of non-SNSCCassociated ISP. All detected mutations took place in exon 20. We also found in one non-SNSCC-associated ISP a mutation in ERBB2 exon 20, analogous to the EGFR exon 20 mutations. Conversely in none of non-ISP-associated SNSCC and sinonasal adenocarcinoma an EGFR mutation was found. TP53 mutations were detected in 50 % of SNSCCassociated ISP and 80 % of their associated SNSCC but in none of non-SNSCC-associated ISP, indicating that TP53 mutations occur later than EGFR/ERBB2 mutations in ISP-tumourigenesis. Furthermore, mutations of MET, NFE2L2 and PIK3CA were described in ISP-associated SNSCC, mutations of MET, KRAS, PIK3CA and TP53 in sinonasal adenocarcinoma, mutations of TP53, NFE2L2, KRAS, PTEN and PIK3CA in non-ISP-associated SNSCC. Conclusion: EGFR/ERBB2 exon 20 driver-mutations are defining a specific molecular tumour entity for SNSCC arising from ISP. According to our preliminary data, the mutational profile of sinonasal carcinoma appear analogous to non-small-cell-lung-cancer. Objective: Breast cancer routine diagnosis is based on a small set of wellcharacterized clinicopathological and molecular variables. We set out to investigate the correlation of these features with the underlying mutation landscape. Method: We evaluated the quantity and quality of mutations in a cohort of 687 primary breast cancer patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. Results: The number of mutated genes was strongly associated with tumour grade (positive association, p = 1.4E − 14) and with the molecular subtypes of breast cancer (p = 1.4E − 10). The number of mutated genes was higher in HR-/HER2-, HR-/HER2+ and HR+/HER2+ breast cancer and compared to HR+/HER2-breast cancer. Furthermore, we detected significant associations of the number of mutated genes with patient age, tumour size and nodal stage. Mutations in specific cancer genes (TP53, NCOR1, NF1, PTPRD and RB1) were significantly associated with high loads of mutated genes. Finally, multivariate analysis of overall survival revealed a worse survival for patients with high numbers (≥22) of mutated genes (hazard ratio = 4.6, 95 % CI: 1.0-20.0, p = 0.044). The study is a step towards genomics-informed breast pathology and provides a basis for future studies in this field bridging the gap between morphology, tumour biology and treatment. Considering the potential role of phospholipases in cell migration, the present findings depicts mechanism of action of simvastatin against MCP-1 dependent cell migration targeting phospholipases (cPLA2 & iPLA2) signaling pathways. Method: Anti-atherogenic effect of simvastatin in human subjects was validated by quantitative assessment of CCR2 transcript levels using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Further, invitro human monocytes migration was analyzed by using microchamber chemotaxis assay whereas, thioglycolate-induced mouse peritoneal inflammation model and adoptive transfer mouse model was employed to analyzed inhibitory effect of simvastatin against monocyte migration both ex-vivo & in-vivo. Results: Simvastatin significantly and dose dependently downregulate CCR2 mRNA expressions in circulating human monocytes. In addition, simvastatin (10 mg/kg) substantially reduced the transmigration of murine monocyte upto 70 % after oral treatment. It also displayed >90 % inhibitory effects in adoptive transfer mouse model at concentration of 10 μg/ml. In addition microchamber chemotaxis assay demonstrates, 2.5 μg/ml, 5 μg/ml, 10 μg/ml of simvastatin significantly reduced human monocytes migration in a concentration dependent fashion induced by human recombinant MCP-1. Conclusion: Simvastatin has potential ability to impair MCP-1 dependent chemotaxis via interfering cPLA2 and iPLA2 signaling pathways. This novel pleiotropic effect of simvastatin on circulating monocytes may prevent the excessive accumulation of monocytes on the arterial wall during the process of atherosclerosis. Objective: Hypertension causes endothelial dysfunction by impairing vascular relaxation eventually develops pressure on the heart. Endothelial disruption leads to inhibition of the release of vasodilators (nitric oxide) causes alteration in vascular cell functions. Cholinergic/ noradrenergic receptors along with voltage-operated channels are involved in control in vascular targets. Method: In the present investigation hypotensive effect of Aegiceras corniculatum, methanol and ethyl acetate extracts and their mechanism of actions were experimentally evaluated in in vivo and in vitro using normotensive rats and rabbit aortic rings. Results: Methanol extract has shown tremendous effect at 10 mg/kg i.v. in reducing mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) 79.2 ± 1.8 mmHg as compared to control group of 128.2 ± 0.8 mmHg in rats, which was significantly suppressed (33 %) in the presence of atropine. Furthermore, methanol extract failed to produce vasodilation in endothelium denuded rabbit aorta and in the presence of L-NAME a nitric oxide synthase inhibitor in phenyleprine contracted tissue. Whereas, ethyl acetate extract exhibited inhibition (35-67 %) in % fall in mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) in the presence of nifidipine (0.3-0.9 mg/kg, i.v.). Antihypertensive effect of extracts were further supported by anti-platelet aggregation and eNOS activation. Conclusion: Methanol and ethyl acetate extracts possess significant hypotensive and vasodilatory activity via muscarinic receptor dependent release of endothelium derived relaxing factor, nitric oxide and calcium channel blocking potential, thus the study validates traditional use of A. corniculatum against cardiovascular disorders. The Objective: To explore the impact of mutations on KRAS, HRAS and NRAS structure and their binding with GTP and GDP. Method: Full length molecular models of wild type RAS proteins were constructed using iterative threading alignment. The models were refined for the structural parameters and thermodynamic parameters. Subsequently, cavity analysis and molecular docking was conducted between GTP/GDP and RAS proteins. Results: Superimposition of RAS proteins with its mutants at tertiary structure level did not show any considerable differences with RMSD deviation ranging from 0.06 to 0.10 Å. However, mutant residues superimposition showed noticeable differences in the spatial orientation. Objective: Molecular Pathology testing relies on the expertise of Histopathologists to determine samples are suitable for molecular testing and to provide an accurate estimation of the tumour nuclei content and cellularity within marked areas for DNA extraction. This is critical for high quality molecular testing and accurate interpretation of variants detected. As part of the delivery of the 100,000 Genomes project, NHS England funded an external quality assessment scheme (EQA) to measure the degree of variation and standardise approaches to tumour assessment. The pilot EQA was provided as an online module for colorectal and lung cancer tissue. Participants estimated the cellularity and percentage of tumour nuclei present on nine H&E slides and annotated regions for macrodissection for molecular testing. Results: Highly variable results were submitted for both tumour types. Tumour nucleic estimations for the same sample ranged from 21 to 80 % and cellularity estimations were inconsistent. Areas marked for macrodissection were often impractical. Full results will be discussed. Conclusion: These results demonstrate a need to measure the degree of variation with the aim to educate and standardise approaches to tumour and cellularity estimations and annotation. This will help prevent inaccurate molecular profiling and false negative results and promote high quality molecular pathology testing. The importance of independent cell free DNA reference standards to evaluate the performance of circulating tumour DNA assays and workflows S. Bartels * , S. W. Janice Ng, M. Saathoff Objective: Internal tandem duplications (ITDs) in FLT3 have been detected in over 20 % of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cases and confer an aggressive phenotype. ITD sequences are identical to reference sequences and vary greatly in size and insertion point, rendering them difficult to detect by next-generation sequencing (NGS). We developed an approach using Anchored Multiplex PCR (AMP™) and bioinformatic analysis tools to amplify, detect and size FLT3-ITDs from DNA samples. Method: We developed the VariantPlex Core AML library preparation kit with AMP probes encompassing the commonly mutated juxtamembrane domain and tyrosine kinase domain 1. Our novel de novo assembly algorithm in Archer Analysis was used to assemble sequenced libraries. Results: The VariantPlex Core AML kit in conjunction with our novel detection algorithm showed both exceptional sensitivity and specificity in the detection of FLT3-ITDs in >2000 in silico datasets and >20 patient DNA samples extracted from blood. These results were concordant with standard capillary gel electrophoresis results. Objective: As an enhancement to the UK NEQAS Molecular Pathology External Quality Assessment (EQA) Scheme a reference sample was provided to enable laboratories to accurately assess the sensitivity and specificity of molecular pathology testing. Method: The reference sample of formalin fixed paraffin embedded cells was custom manufactured by Thermo Scientific™ (AcroMetrix™) and was distributed a part of the Molecular Pathology EQA run. The sample contained 555 variants in 53 clinically relevant genes at allelic frequencies ranging from 1 to 17.9 % (average 5.3 %). Laboratories were invited to genotype and submit results to the Scheme, provide methodology details, list genes tested and the levels of detected variants. Results: One-hundred and one laboratories reported 3008 test results on 53 different genes. As expected, testing for mutations with clinical relevance was prevalent. Few false positives were reported (0.7 %), however a number of laboratories did not detect clinically important variants within regions tested. The ability of methods to detect low level variants will be discussed. Conclusion: The use of a standardized reference sequence has successfully enabled laboratories to measure the test sensitivity and specificity inhouse and provided inter-laboratory comparisons of methodologies and limits of detection for the testing of solid tumour variants. Enabling PD-L1 IHC standardisation using defined reference standards and digital pathology D. Cougot * , F. Patell-Socha, P. Collin, C. Barker, P. Morrill, K. Schmitt * Horizon Discovery, Cambridge, United Kingdom Objective: There is growing concern regarding intra-and inter-laboratory reproducibility of Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays performed with Formalin-Fixed Paraffin Embedded (FFPE) tissue sections. For new targets such as Program cell Death Ligand-1 (PD-L1) this need is becoming crucial, especially given the breadth of potential variables, including the range of companion diagnostic assays. There is a growing need to have defined, consistent and sustainable reference materials to support reproducibility and methodology transfer. Method: Using CRISPR gene editing technology, we have developed precisely defined PD-L1 IHC HDx™ Reference Standards. Results: PD-L1 IHC HDx™ Reference Standards have a range of controlled protein expression to understand the differences in assay performance, establish the practical lower limit of detection, support laboratories with tools to routinely monitor and standardize workflows, from instrumentation to assay to antibody. Cell lines are extensively characterised by molecular and protein assays. In addition, we use quantitative digital pathology to further define positive and negative core. Conclusion: PD-L1 IHC HDx™ Reference Standards have been successfully used to control the performance of the four PD-L1 IHC assays currently used to support the PD-L1 drugs. Method: Here we describe a case of a 60 year old female with history of hairy cell leukemia who presented with aphasia and forgetfulness. A follow up Brain CT scan showed 3 distinct brain lesions which were found to be diagnostic of melanoma (confirmed by immunohistochemistry) with no evidence of a concurrent brain involvement by a B-Cell neoplasm. Molecular studies confirmed the same BRAF V600E mutation in both malignancies (Hairy cell leukemia and melanoma). Results: Thereafter the patient was started on BRAF inhibitor treatment and is now symptom-free after 1 year of follow up. Conclusion: Having two concurrent malignancies with a shared BRAF mutation is extremely rare and makes this an excellent example of a genomic marker-driven treatment in two histologically and immunophenotypically distinct tumours. Objective: Along with the implementation of highly sensitive and/or mutation-specific antibodies, immunohistochemistry has been considered an alternative method for identifying driver mutations in lung adenocarcinomas. In this study, the feasibility of immunohistochemistry in therapeutic diagnosis in comparison with molecular-based methods was addressed. Method: A total of 205 lung adenocarcinomas were examined for therapeutic driver mutations, including EGFR mutations and ALK and ROS1 rearrangements using real-time PCR, fluorescence in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry in parallel. The association between these driver mutations and clinicopathological characteristics was also evaluated. Results: We found 58.5 % of cases harboring EGFR mutations, 6.3 % with ALK rearrangements and 1.0 % with ROS1 rearrangements. EGFR mutations were more prevalent in female, non-smokers, and positively associated with micropapillary-predominant pattern; ALK rearrangements were significantly associated with adenocarcinomas with cribriform-predominant pattern, extracellular mucin production and signet ring morphology. Immunohistochemistry of EGFR mutations showed an excellent specificity but the sensitivity is suboptimal, while immunohistochemistry of ALK and ROS1 rearrangements demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity. No significant difference regarding the performance of different antibody clones was observed, except clone 43B2 showed a higher sensitivity than SP111 in the detection of EGFR mutations. Conclusion: An immunohistochemistry-based lung adenocarcinoma testing algorithm in therapeutic diagnoses was proved to be applicable and effective. Objective: Molecular profiling studies of endometrial or ovarian tumours have identified molecular alterations with diagnostic, prognostic or theranostic value. Next generation sequencing (NGS) is an attractive technology for gene panel sequencing. However, transfer of NGS technology to an ISO15189-certified laboratory requires validation. Method: We validated an Ion Torrent AmpliSeq custom panel comprising of 78 amplicons targeting hotspots of 16 genes altered in endometrial and ovarian tumours. We analysed specificity, sensitivity and precision using 2 commercial reference standards, 5 non neoplastic tissues, 16 ovarian tumours and 11 endometrial carcinomas. Finally, 10 samples tested in another lab for FOXL2 mutations were analyzed with our NGS panel. Results: Sensitivity and specificity for detecting variants at an AF >4 % was 96.8 and 100 %, respectively for commercial reference standards. Among the 27 cases, all were successfully sequenced. All expected mutations were detected using our custom panel. The concordance for the detection of FOXL2 mutation was of 100 % with the other lab. Conclusion: Overall, our NGS panel focused on molecular alterations observed in endometrial and ovarian tumours was specific and sensitive and can be incorporated in an ISO15189-certified laboratory. Objective: In cancer cell biology, the architectural concept "form follows function" is reflected by cell morphology, migration and EMT protein expression pattern. Features of EMT are associated with tumour budding. Hereby, little is known about tumour buds and their migration pattern in 3D. This study aimed to redefine the processes of tumour budding and cell dissemination. Method: Serial formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue slices were used for virtual 3D reconstruction of pancreatic, breast, colon and lung adenocarcinoma and stained for PanCK, ZEB1 and E-Cadherin. Tumour cells were characterized for morphology (polarized/rounded/spindle-like) and EMT marker expression (ZEB1/E-Cadherin). Results: The majority of tumour buds are 2D artifacts. Decreasing individual cell cluster size is the strongest determinant of increasing partial EMT features. Using a regression model, a strong inverse correlation of cancer cell cluster size and EMT features was confirmed. We were able to define a sequence of partial EMT at the invasive front (E-Cadherin loss, ZEB1 expression, rounded cell morphology). Conclusion: Cancer cell dissemination is accompanied with histomorphological changes suggesting partial EMT in rare cancer cells. The sequence observed was loss of membranous E-Cadherin and shift to cytoplasmic expression, followed by nuclear ZEB1 staining, rounded/amoeboid morphology and finally mesenchymal-like spindle shape. Objective: Brain metastasis remains a major driver of cancer mortality. The runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) is a tumour suppressor gene that has a critical role in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. We investigated RUNX3 RNA expression in selected solid tumours paired with their brain metastasis. Method: A retrospective study was performed on archived tissue from cases with both primary tumour and brain metastasis available. RNA was extracted from formalin-fixed-paraffin-embedded tissue using a commercially available kit. RUNX3 RNA levels were tested using gene-specific primers and SYBER Green on tumours as well as control tissues by quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with beta actin being the internal control. Results: Forty samples from 20 adult patients with solid tumours (n = 20) and brain metastasis (n = 20) were analyzed. Solid tumours included lung adenocarcinoma (n = 15), invasive breast carcinoma (n = 4) and melanoma (n = 1). Male:female ratio was 3.3 (M = 14; F = 6) and the median age was 61 years (ranging from 39 to 80 years). The RUNX3 expression was significantly lower in the brain metastasis compared to the primary site (p < 0.0001). Conclusion: RUNX3 loss likely has a potential role in solid tumour metastasis to the brain and poses a potential target for treatment. Larger scale studies are warranted to better understand the mechanism of this dysregulation. Objective: Diabetes mellitus is often correlated with alterations of lacrimal gland components, tear film and ocular surface; their pathogenic basis often suggests signaling pathway changes associated with oxidative stress which contributes as major trigger of severe lacrimal gland injury. Our study assess whether the diabetes effects on rat lacrimal gland were mediated by oxidative stress involvement, exploring biomarkers of lipid peroxidation and identifying the diabetic alterations in rat lacrimal gland. Method: Diabetes was induced in Wistar rats with a single intravenous streptozocin. Oxidant status was determined. The lacrimal gland samples were removed at the end of the experiment, H&E stained and histopathological exam was performed using a Nikon Eclipse 50i light microscope. Immunohistochemistry was used to assess HEL expression in lacrimal glands of normal and diabetic rats. Results: Lacrimal gland morphology in diabetic rats was altered, acinar and ductal structures presented different degrees of histological changes, glandular epithelial height decreased and lipofuscin deposits were frequently observed. HEL was expressed in lacrimal gland of diabetic rats, more frequently in a periductal and vascular endothelium distribution. Conclusion: Histological changes and the expression of oxidative markers in lacrimal gland of diabetic rat strongly suggest a correlation between diabetes mellitus, oxidative stress and glandular functional decline; it also provide evidence of a tear film disfunction. Objective: The IgG4-related disease is a specific inflammatory disorder characterized by the presence of elevated serum IgG4, inflammatory infiltrates rich of IgG4-positive plasma cells and fibrosis. Only single cases of uvea and retina involvement in IgG4-related disease were reported. We report a rare case of IgG4-related disease with involvement of the eyes, salivary glands, sphenoid sinus and lymph nodes. Method: 57 years old female presented with a history of right submandibular gland enlargement. Later exudative retinal detachment of the right eye was diagnosed together with the left submandibular gland enlargement and a lesion within the right sphenoidal sinus. Both glands and a lesion were excised and histology showed lymphoid hyperplasia. Results: 6 months later decrement in visual acuity of the left eye was diagnosed. Ophtalmoscopy and optical coherence tomography showed proliferation of the pigment epithelium and fibrosis. PETscan showed enlarged right axillary and right pulmonary lymph nodes. Systemic nature of the disease rise the suspicion of IgG4related disease. Conclusion: Histology of the previously excised lesions was reviewed and IHC was performed. Salivary gland lesions showed brisk lymphoid and plasma cell infiltration, storyform fibrosis and obliterative phlebitis. IHC showed many IgG4-positive cells. Also serum IgG4 was elevated up to 454 μg/ml. Systemic corticoids was prescribed. Objective: The major characteristic of Glaucoma is the elevated intraocular pressure at a level high enough to provoke tissue damage causing optic neuropathy, with a highly specific excavation of the optic disc that leads to a progressive loss of visual field. The loss of sight in absolute glaucoma is also caused by the degeneration of the retinal ganglion cells. Method: A delicate balance exist between the production of aqueous humor and its outflow from the eye through the trabecular meshwork and the Schlemm canal. Accessory pathways are the iris vessels and the posterior uveoscleral outflow via the ciliary body and the vortex veins. If these routes are affected, the intraocular pressure increases and the patient presents with glaucoma associated symptoms. Results: We report the case of a 54-year-old male presenting with painful Absolute Glaucoma of the right eye, that required enucleation, associated with cataract and Rubeosis Iridis. A standard Hematoxylin-Eosin stain exposed the following: marked atrophy of the nervous fibers that compose the optic nerve, outward bulging lamina cribrosa, and mixoid degeneration of the optic nerve disc, glaucomatous retinal atrophy and iridocorneal sinechiae. Objective: To study the histopathological pattern of retinoblastoma in relation to demographic data and clinical presentation. Method: This is a descriptive retrospective case series study of 54 retinoblastoma patients conducted over 2 years in Makkah Eye hospital (Main Eye Center in Sudan). Data was collected from the hospital records. Paraffin embedded blocks and slides of cases were reviewed. Results: The patients' ages ranged from 3 months to 10 years, with a peak at 4 years of age. The mean age of 3.4 years (±1.68SD). Half of the cases presented with a mass, followed by leukoria (40.7 %) and proptosis (9.3 %). All our cases underwent removal of eye; 5 of whom had fungating mass with extra-ocular extension that necessitate exentration. All the cases had one or more poor prognostic histologic feature(s) (necrosis, extra-ocular extension, calcification, optic nerve involvement and involvement of the sclera, choroid and ciliary body). Conclusion: The commonest age of presentation of Retinoblastoma is 1-9 years with a peak at 4 years. All our cases underwent removal of the eye and all have poor histopathologic prognostic features. Our results are in conformity with the African literature, but is different from American and European findings. Objective: Primary orbital lymphoma is a rare disease and accounts between 8 and 15 % of extranodal presentations. It's the most common malignant orbital tumour in adult (10 %). We aim to describe the epidemiological and clinicopathological caracteristics of this entity. Method: We report a case of a 31-year-old women who presented exophthalmia since 3 months. Results: Brain MRI showed a left 5 cm orbital tumour, including the muscles rectus superior, the lateral rectus muscle and the lacrimal gland. The biopsy revealed fibro fatty tissue with diffuse tumour infiltration of small lymphocytic cell, to scant cytoplasm and round hyperchromatic nucleus. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity of tumour cells for CD20, CD23 and CD5. The diagnosis was lymphoma B-small cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia cell type (LLC). The patient had 4 cycles of CHOP chemotherapy with good response and consolidation radiotherapy. The evolution was marked by recurrent proptosis 9 years later. A biopsy with pathologic examination confirmed the lymphoma infiltration type LLC. FCR chemotherapy was prescribed. The orbital lymphoma is a rare and often indolent disease. The common orbital lymphomas are MALT. LLCs are extremely rare. The diagnosis is made by histological and immunohistochemistry exam. Orbital MRI and or CT reveal tumour extension and guide therapy. The main differential diagnosis is inflammatory pseudotumour. The Value of 'en toto' globe submission in the assessment of high risk retinoblastoma cases and subsequent plan for treatment H. was found between density of CD68-positive cells and clinical parameters. However, high-levels of CD163-positive TAMs were associated with lower disease stage and M0 status (p = 0.034 and 0.008, respectively). Multivariate analysis did not show any significant relationship between density of CD68 or CD163-positive cells and survival. Conclusion: High-levels of CD163-positive macrophages correlated negatively with stage of Ewing sarcoma. CD163 proved to represent a sensitive marker of macrophages, but based on our results not specific for M2 phenotype, detection of which needs multiple staining using more markers. Objective: Sarcomas represent a biologically very heterogeneous group of tumours. Methylation array-based profiling has been successfully employed by us to device a classification tool for primary brain tumours. Based on this experience, we expanded our analyses to a set of 600 genetically well-characterized sarcomas. Method: Genome-wide methylation analysis was performed using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Hierarchical cluster analysis identified the CpG probes most highly correlated with distinct sarcoma types. Based a on random forest algorithm, we developed a sarcoma classifier. Genome-wide copy number profiles generated from the raw array data provided additional diagnostic information. Results: Based on their methylation profile sarcomas could be precisely separated into groups closely matching histopathological entities. All sarcomas with distinctive genetic alterations were assigned to entityspecific clusters, whereas sarcomas with complex genetic alterations clustered to either entity specific (e.g. in MPNSTs or leiomyosarcomas), or entity enriched clusters (e.g. in dedifferentiated liposarcomas). Interestingly, we identified novel methylation subgroups in certain sarcoma entities. Cross validation evaluating the robustness of our classes indicated an accurate prediction for >95 % of our reference cases. Conclusion: This work illustrates that DNA methylation profiling has the potential to support and improve the classification of bone and soft tissue sarcomas. Objective: Aneurysmal cyst of soft tissue(ACST) is a very rare benign soft tissue tumour that is histologically identical to aneurysmal bone cyst, but that shows no association with the skeleton. It arises in the deep soft tissues of the extremities of adults. Male and female individuals are affected equally. Method: A 18-year-old women was admitted with a painless mass of left lateral thigh. Plain radiograhs demonstrated a peripheral calcified mass within muscle. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed 5.5 × 3.5 cm wellcircumscribed mass with blood-filled cystic spaces. Results: Histopathological examination showed multilocular cystic lesion. Blood or serous fluid-filled cystic spaces were divided by nonendothelial lined septae composed of a mixture of mononuclear spindle cells and osteoclast-like giant cells. Hemosiderin-laden macrophages were present. Mitosis and necrosis were not seen. A shell of well-formed bone was also seen at the periphery of the tumour. The spindle cells were positive for smooth muscle actin, vimentin and CD68. Multinucleated giant cells and macrophages were also positive for CD68. Conclusion: If the surgical excision is incomplete, then local recurrence may develop, but aggressive local growth or metastases do not occur. The differential diagnosis of ACST should include giant cell tumour of soft tissue (GCTST), myositis ossificans(MO) and soft tissue osteosarcoma (STO). The evaluation of importance of new immunohistochemical markers for the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of mesenchymal tumours G. Gonlusen * , S. [2004] [2005] [2006] [2007] [2008] [2009] [2010] [2011] [2012] [2013] [2014] , diagnosed at our institution, were included in this study, after review.In referral cases,initial and final diagnosis were compared to identify discrepancies(major and minor). Objective: Mesenchymal tumours, in general, and schwannomas, in particular, are extremely rare among primary gastric neoplasm. We presented here three cases of gastric schwannoma with analysis of histological and immunohistochemical features. Method: Review of hematoxylin-eosin slides of all gastric "mesenchymal tumours" from pathology files (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) . Immunohistochemical studies for S100, α-SMA, KIT (CD117), desmin, vimentin and CD34. Results: All patients were women (67-, 54-and 56-year-old) presented with mild abdominal pain duration of 3 and 6 months. Tumour size is as follows 4.0 × 4.5, 2.0 × 2.5 and 6.0 × 7.5 cm. One patient died of colon cancer 4 years later, second and third are free of disease 8 and 7 years. Histologically, spindle cells proliferation of moderate cellularity with diffuse chronic inflammation and peripheral lymphoid cuff typified each tumour. Nuclear palisading was barely visible. Mild cellular atypia, mitotic rate 7/50 HPFs were identified in the one case, mitotic rate of other tumours-5/50 HPFs. Immunohistochemically, in every case tumours represented "schwannoma" phenotype-expressed S100 and vimentin with negativity for CD34, KIT, SMA, and desmin. Objective: Synovial sarcoma (SS) commonly arises in the paraarticular regions. It usually located around knee and ankle joint, hip, shoulder and elbow. But SS has been described in various other locations. In such cases the correct diagnosis is often difficult. We report a case of primary SS revealed in the spermatic cord, since we found only a few descriptions of this tumour in an inguinal area. Method: A 54-year-old man was presented with a slow growing slightly painful focal thickening of the left spermatic cord for the past 4 months. This lesion clinically was diagnosed as a cyst and surgically excised. It measured up to 3 cm in diameter. Cut surface was yellow-white with focal hemorrhages and firm. Histological and immunohistochemical studies were performed. Results: Microscopically the tumour was biphasic and resembled SS. It had spindle cells arranged in fascicles and plump epithelial cells forming poorly differentiated glandular structures, cords and solid sheets. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that tumour cells were positive for panCK (particularly in the epithelial component), bcl-2, CD99 (more in the spindle cell component), CD57, Vimentin, S-100. At the same time, they were negative for CK20, CEA, Mesothelin, SMA, Desmin, AFP, CD45, Inhibin, WT1. Ki-67 was estimated at 60 %. Metastatic process was excluded. Conclusion: Primary SS of the spermatic cord is extremely rare tumour, but it is necessary to aware of the possibility of its development in this area. Application of an immunohistochemical marker panel helps to avoid diagnostic mistakes. Objective: Giant cell tumour is benign but local aggressive tumour seen as lytic lesion in epiphyseometaphyseal region of the long bones. Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL), expressed by mononuclear stromal cells, is held responsible for the aggressive osteolytic nature. Recurrence in %15-50 and malign transformation in less than %1 of cases has been reported. Standart treatment ranges from surgical curettage to radical resection and denosumab treatment is recently introduced in unresectable, recurrent GCTs. Denosumab is human monoclonal antibody against the RANKL, which acts by blocking the interaction between osteoclastic and mononuclear cells and this results in a decrease in bone resorption. Method: Four cases of denosumab-treated GCT were here presented. Pre-and posttreatment biopsies were evaluated and the therapy related histopathological changes were discussed. Results: Histopathological changes included pseudosarcomatous atypia, giant cell loss and osteoid production. Objective: Intraosseous benign notochordal cell tumours are rare and the likely precursors of chordoma. A benign notochordal lesion is presented and the differential diagnosis between benign and malign notochordal lesions is discussed. Method: A case of the intravertebral benign notochordal cell tumour is presented with clinical, radiological and histopathological features. A 42 year-old woman, was examined for lumbago and right leg pain with loss of bladder control. In MRI, a posterior corporeal lesion on L4 of 20 mm in diameter was in hypersignal T2, hyposignal T1, nonenhanced. The patient underwent tumour resection. The dura was compressed via the tumour. Histologically, the lesion consist of sheets of vacuolated or less vacuolated eosinophilic tumour cells with round nuclei. The immunochemical techniques revealed diffuse positivity of the cells with anti-AE1/AE3, LMWCK, protein S100 and vimentin. Conclusion: The striking histologic similarity of the embryonal notochordal vestiges of intervertebral disks, and ecchordosis physaliphoras, benign notochord cell tumours, giant notochordal hamartoma, and chordomas render their various diagnosis difficult, especially on biopsy. Correlation of clinical, radiologic, and histopathologic studies is needed for accurate diagnosis and management of all lesions of notochordal origin. Clinical and histopathological difficulties in differential diagnosis of alveolar soft part sarcoma in a three-year-old patient: A case report Objective: Alveolar soft part sarcoma(ASPS) is an extremely rare tumour, with an enigmatic histogenesis, without a totally specific immunohistochemical profile, accounting for less than 1 % of soft tissue tumours overall. Method: We present a case of a paediatric patient with a slow-growing supraorbital mass first catalogued as hemangioma; based on this assumption, laser therapy was performed in a dermatology clinic from another country, but the tumour growth accelerated. Surgical excision was decided with complete tumour removal. A first morphologic suspicion of ASPS was formulated and the case was sent to our department in consultation. Method: Two IMT cases (from a 60-year-old male and a 27-year-old female) were retrieved from our department's files by means of a parametric research (years 2011 to 2016) . In addition to routine histological and immunohistochemical studies, we performed FISH to evaluate ALK rearrangements. Results: IMT diagnosis was based on the presence of spindled myofibroblastic and inflammatory cells on an oedematous myxoid and collagenized background. Myofibroblastic cells exhibited immunoreactivity for actin and vimentin but failed to show either ALK cytoplasmic immunostaining or ALK rearrangements. Conclusion: IMT is an uncommon neoplasm with a peculiar histological pattern and immunohistochemical profile that may or may not show ALK immunoreactivity and rearrangements. In the presence of characteristic histological and immunohistochemical features, the lack of ALK changes does not exclude the diagnosis of IMT in adults. Method: The studied material consisted of bone, muscle, joint and ST samples obtained by biopsy or surgical excision from 99 patients confirmed with TB usually histologically, by Ziehl-Neelsen staining but, sometimes, by immunohistochemistry or PCR techniques. Results: Patients with OATB were usually adults or elderly men, hospitalized mainly in orthopedics and rheumatology clinics whereas patients with STTB were rather women, in adulthood, hospitalized especially in general or thoracic surgery clinics. Granulomatous reaction was in both groups usually of well differentiated type, active, with epithelioid and Langhans cells, classical acidophilic caseous necrosis, centrally located and rarely with perifocal fibrosis. There was, however, a significant contingent of poorly differentiated or disorganized type granulomas in the STTB group. The morphological picture revealed in very rare cases the active and destructive profile of the bacillary aggression. Conclusion: OATB and SSTB are a certitude, even the cases are rare. Therefore, one should pay attention to patients around 50 years aged, with swelling accompanied by local inflammatory symptoms of joints regions or ST structures accesssible to clinical examination. Diagnostics of chronic systemic inflammation (CSI) in patients with inflammatory joint diseases L. Solomatina * , I. Zhuravleva * Objective: CSI is pathological process characterised by such indicators as the systemic nature of the damaging factor, generation of inflammatory mechanisms, persistent balance between alteration and resistance factors. Objectives. To evaluate the SCI occurrence rate in inflammatory diseases and to assess the possibility of SCI monitoring using individual homeostasis indicators. Method: Patients gruops: rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (n = 26), ankylosing spondylitis (AS) (n = 27) and reactive arthritis (ReA) (n = 30) were examined. The levels of interleukins-6,8,10, TNFα, CRP, cortisol, myoglobin, troponin I and D-dimers in blood plasma samples were evaluated using CLIA (Immulite). Basing on these markers and applying an in-house procedure, an integrated criterion-a SCI Scale ranging from 0 to 8was developed. The value of above 3 points indicated SCI. Results: SCI was identified in 38.5 % patients with RA, in 20 % patients with ReA and in 11.1 % patients with AS. SIR is considered to be a key SCI feature, the applicability of individual SIR criteria for SCI monitoring was assessed. Conclusion: Univariate analyses were promising. Multivariate tests could not confirm prognostic impact of FNCLCC grade, MDM2 gene amplification level or myogenic differentiation. However, the limited numbers in our series preclude any robust conclusion. Therefore, we set up a multicentric collaboration with 2 sarcoma referral centers. Results from the extended cohort are pending. Correlation of microvessel density with proliferation index and clinico-pathological parameters in primary malignant bone tumours: A pilot study A. Jain * , S. Qayoom, V. Maheshwari, R. Chaturvedi, V. Jain * Jains Diagnostic Centre, Aligarh, India Objective: Bone tumours constitute 0.5 % of the total world cancer incidence, and remain a daunting challenge. A better disease free survival rate has been observed with the current multimodality treatment; however prognosis of patients with unresectable primary tumour, clinically evident metastasis or refractory to treatment remains dismal. In this regard, more beneficial prognostic factors and more effective therapeutic modalities are needed. Proliferation index is suggested as an important prognostic marker for bone tumours. Tumour growth and metastasis have been shown to strongly depend on angiogenesis, however, data regarding the relevance of angiogenesis and prognosis in malignant bone tumours are scarce and controversial. With this background in mind, objectives of present study Objective: Controversies regarding the benefits and complications of the injection of corticosteroids (CE) for the treatment of tendinopathies. Our aim was to evaluate the histological, biomechanical effects, and expression of metalloproteinases and interleukins on Achilles tendons of rabbits treated with CE. Method: The Test Group with 37 rabbits underwent to injection of CE (1.4 mg of betamethasone) in the Achilles tendon of the right pelvic limb. Control Group 36 animals with one injection of saline solution (CP-Placebo Control) and the left Achilles tendon received no procedure (CN-Normal Control) . Forty-eight hours after, the tendons were dissected and extracted at an extension of 4 cm from its insertion in the calcaneus bones. The expressions of metalloproteinases (MMP-1/MMP-2) and interleukins(IL-1/IL-6), biomechanical resistance (load x elongation parameters) and histomorphometric(HE, Picrosirius red) analysis, were all performed by observers unaware of the groups. Results: Test Group had significant reduction MMP-2 expression compared to the both controls (p = 0.027). CP was an increase of thick collagen fibers in comparison with CN (p = 0.041). There was no additional significant statistical difference between the groups when comparing variables. Conclusion: Decrease of MMP-2 expression after a single intratendinous injection of CE in the Aquilles Tendon of rabbits, suggesting a potential minor collagen degradation. Objective: Since it has been described the adverse effects of cigarette smoking on bone healing, we aimed to evaluate the effects of cigarette smoke (CS) exposure on osteogenesis. Method: C57Bl/6 male mice were exposed to CS for 45 days, for 30 min (12 ± 1 cigarettes), 2 times/day, 5 days/week. The Control group was exposed to ambient air at the same times. At 46th day, animals were anesthetized for euthanasia and the right tibae were surgically extracted for analysis and part of them were included in methyl-methacrylate and stained with toluidine blue for measuring structural parameters, bone resorption and mineralization and the others were decalcified and stained with Picrosirius for evaluation of collagen amounts. Results: Animals exposed to CS showed a higher amount of signals of bone remodeling, trabecular narrow-ing (p = 0.0004), smaller number of osteoblasts and osteocytes, larger number of osteoclasts and more vascular and cellular infiltration in the bone marrow (p = 0.03). Also, there was an increase in bone resorption with a concomitant delay in bone mineralization (p = 0.01). The collagen percentage analysis revealed an increase significantly in collagen amounts suggesting a bone remodeling process (p < 0.001). The CS exposure promoted a delay in osteogenesis characterized by increase in bone resorption, decreased mineralization and an important collagen remodeling, compromising the turn over and density of bone. Method: In the present study, we examined the clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, molecular, and follow-up characteristics of 3 cases of superficial Ewing sarcoma-like tumours of the foot. One case was restricted to the dermis, two were located in both the dermis and subcutaneous adipose tissue. Results: All studied tumours composed of cohesive sheets and trabeculae of small blue round cells with a vague rosetting pattern, slightly overlapping nuclei, finely stippled chromatin, and scanty cytoplasm with indistinct cytoplasmic borders. The tumours were strongly and diffusely positive for CD99 with a characteristic membranous staining pattern and negative for muscular and lymphoid markers. Two of three cases contained scarce cytokeratin-positive cells. One tumour showed focal reactivity for EMA and S100 protein. The diagnosis of extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma family tumour was based on histology, immunohistochemistry and molecular cytogenetics (FISH study using EWSR1 break apart probe). Differential diagnoses (carcinoma, melanoma, lymphoma, Merkel cell carcinoma, poorly differentiated synovial sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma) were ruled out on the basis of morphology and immunohistochemical staining. The differential diagnosis with EWSR1-related myoepithelial neoplasms were discussed separately. Conclusion: Cutaneous or subcutaneous Ewing sarcoma-like malignant tumours remain exceedingly rare neoplasms and they should taken in consideration in differential diagnosis of superficial located small blue round cel tumours. Objective: Sternocostoclavicular hyperostosis (SCCH) is a rare inflammatory disorder of the axial skeleton, characterised by chronic sterile osteomyelitis associated with sclerosis and hyperostosis. We addressed the potential association with autoimmune processes by evaluating the lifetime prevalence of autoimmune disease in 70 Dutch patients with adult-onset SCCH and their first degree relatives (parents, siblings and children). Method: Survey data were collected through structured telephone interviews with patients and matched with available medical records. Danish hospital registry data for autoimmune diseases (ICD8/10) were used as reference data. Results: A diagnosis of at least one autoimmune disease was reported in 20 SCCH patients (29 %) and in 47/518 relatives (9.1 %), compared to an estimated 3.9 % prevalence in the Danish reference population. A diversity of autoimmune diseases was reported in SCCH patients and relatives, most frequently psoriasis vulgaris (14 % of patients). Palmoplantar pustulosis was reported by 28 patients (40 %)-its inclusion as a putative autoimmune disease increased the overall prevalence of autoimmune disease to 54 %. Conclusion: The high prevalence of autoimmune disease in patients with SCCH and their first degree relatives suggests that autoimmunity may be linked to the still elusive pathophysiology of the intriguing osteogenic response to inflammation observed in this rare bone disorder. Necdin overexpression is an independent poor prognostic factor for patients with urothelial carcinomas I. Results: NDN transcriptional level was significantly higher in UCs of both sites with stepwise more advanced pT statuses. Through immunohistochemistry, we found Necdin expression was significantly associated with adverse clinicopathological parameters, e.g., advanced pT status, nodal metastasis, high grade histological patterns, and frequent mitotses. (all P < 0.05). In univariate analysis, Necdin overexpression not only predicted worse DSS and MeFS in both the UTUC and UBUC groups, it also served as an independent prognostic factor for DSS and MeFS in multivariate analysis (all P < 0.05). Conclusion: NDN may play an important role in tumour progression in UC and could serve as a prognostic biomarker and a potential novel therapeutic target in UC. The Objective: By subjecting a documented transcriptome dataset of urothelial carcinoma of bladder (GSE31684) to data mining and focusing on genes linked to peptidase activity (GO:0008233), we recognized C1S as the most significantly upregulated gene related to more aggressive disease. We subsequently analyzed the association of both C1S mRNA and protein expression with the clinical and pathological significance. Method: We used real-time RT-PCR to detect C1S transcriptional levels in 20 cases each of urothelial carcinoma of bladder and upper tract. An immunohistochemical stain was conducted to determine C1s protein expression in urothelial carcinoma of upper tract (n = 340) and urinary bladder (n = 295). Furthermore, we examined the correlation of C1s expression with clinicopathological characteristics, disease-specific survival, and metastasis-free survival. Results: C1S transcriptional levels were significantly high in patients with advanced-stage tumours of both groups (all P < 0.05). By immunohistochemistry, C1s overexpression was not only significantly associated with adverse clinicopathological parameters, but also predictive of poor disease-specific and metastasis-free survival rates for both urothelial carcinoma groups (all P < 0.05). It was also an independent prognostic factor in the multivariate analysis (all P < 0.05). Conclusion: C1s may play a pivotal role in urothelial carcinoma progress and can represent a vital prognostic marker and a promising new therapeutic target in urothelial carcinoma. Expression of BRCA2 protein in prostatectomy and its correlation with needle core biopsy in patients with prostate cancer A. Ribeiro-Silva * , S. Duarte, J. Zanetti, R. Pereira, R. Reis * Ribeirão Preto Medical School, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil Objective: Prostate cancer is the most frequent malignant tumour in the masculine population worldwide. BRCA2 tumour suppressor gene is one of the few genetic biomarkers that are associated with increased prostate cancer risk, although its influence in cancer progression after the initial diagnosis is still debatable. Our study aims to verify the BRCA2 protein expression in prostatic adenocarcinomas with Gleason's score ≤7 in needle core biopsies that, after prostatectomy, were reclassified with Gleason's score ≥7. Method: Immunohistochemistry for BRCA2 was performed in 125paired samples of biopsy and prostatectomy with the diagnosis of prostate cancer. Results: BRCA2 was overexpressed in all tumours that were reclassified as Gleason's score ≥7 after prostatectomy. In these tumours, BRCA2 overexpression also correlated with angiolymphatic invasion, bilateral tumour and staging. Conclusion: Our data suggest that BRCA2 can predict a higher Gleason score as well as a more aggressive behavior in prostatectomy specimens. Objective: Juxtaglomerular cell tumour of kidney is a rare neoplasm with only about 100 cases reported. It is characterized by the production of renin, with a clinical picture of hypertension, hyperaldosteronism, and hypokalemia. We report a case with unusual immunoprofile. Method: A 37-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital for investigation of a refractory hypertension. CT scans identified a renal tumour with 25 × 22mm that was biopsed. Histologically the tumour was a spindle cell neoplasm with fascicular growth pattern; neoplastic cells were bland. Immunostains were positive for actin, CD34 and Bcl-2 (negative for cytokeratins and desmin). Results: A diagnosis of solitary fibrous tumour was made. The patient abandoned medical follow-up and returned 1 year after, when a partial nephrectomy was performed. In the nephrectomy specimen, histologic features were similar and complementary immunohistochemistry revealed positivity for CD117 and beta-catenin (cytoplasmic). Electron microscopy showed dense rhomboid cytoplasmic crystals, allowing the diagnosis of juxtaglomerular cell tumour of kidney. Conclusion: Although the literature refers that juxtaglomerular cell tumour is a CD34-positive and Bcl-2-negative neoplasm, we report a case that was both CD34 and Bcl-2-positive. This is the first case reported in the literature with this immunohistochemical profile, which constitutes a considerable diagnostic pitfall, mainly with solitary fibrous tumour. Objective: Urothelial carcinoma (UC) is a type of tumour, especially of the urinary bladder, that affects people worldwide. Clarification of its detailed tumour biology and discovery of potential targets for developing treatment strategies are imperative because of frequent recurrences and poor prognosis of advanced UCs. By data mining a published dataset of UC of bladder (UCB) transcriptome (GSE31684) from Gene Expression Omnibus, we identified that THBS2 was the most significantly upregulated gene among those related to structural molecule activity (GO:0005198). Method: THBS2 immunostaining was performed in 340 UCs of upper urinary tract (UC-UUTs) and 295 UCBs; subsequently, both groups were dichotomized into high-and low-expression subgroups. Moreover, statistical analyses were performed to correlate the association between THBS2 expression and clinicopathological parameters with two survival indexes: disease-specific survival (DSS) and metastasis-free survival (MeFS). Results: High THBS2 immunoexpression was significantly associated with advanced primary tumour status, nodal metastasis, and vascular invasion in both UC-UUT and UCB groups (all P ≤ .001). In addition, THBS2 overexpression was linked to adverse DSS and MeFS in univariate analyses and served as an independent prognosticator indicating poor outcomes in both groups in multivariate analyses. Conclusion: THBS2 may play a crucial role in UC progression and may be a novel prognostic marker. Objective: The prostate cancer occupies a leading position in structure of morbidity by malignant tumours in men in different countries. In the Belgorod region over the past 10 years this pathology progressively increased almost threefold. Method: The exploration of prostate tissues of 60 patients with prostate cancer and 25 patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia was carried out with help of light, confocal and raster electronic microscopy with usage of console for dot study of macro-and microelements and immunohistochemistry (PSA, p63, Ki-6, К5 и К18). Results: The polymorphic cells with thin "bridges" between them, which exceed sizes of cells in some sites and form branched structures, located inside ducts of glands were revealed at prostate cancer with help of scanning microscopy. The reliable increasing of some microelements was traced in case of adenocarcinoma in comparison with benign prostatic hyperplasia: sodium(4,10 ± 0,06; 2,35 ± 0,05), magnesium(12,10 ± 0,82; 1,29 ± 0,04), phosphorus ( Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate HER-2/neu oncogene expression in urothelial bladder cancer (UCB) and its correlation with tumour clinicopathological parameters. Method: 80 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded specimens of primary UCB were processed. The specimens were analyzed for HER-2/neu protein overexpression by immunohistochemistry. Results: Tumour specimens belonged to 52 men (65 %) and 28 women (35 %) with a mean age of 59 years. Tumour grades were 1, 2, and 3 in 12 (15 %), 44 (55 %), and 24 (30 %) specimens, respectively. A total of 48 (60 %) patients were positive for overexpression of HER-2/neu. Two cases of HER-2/neu-positive (4.16 %) were grade 1 tumours, 14 (29.16 %) grade 2, and 32 (66.66 %) grade 3. HER-2/neu was positive in 28 (58.33 %) superficial and 20 (41.66 %) muscle invasive tumours as well as in 31 (64.5 %) recurrent tumours, and 9 (18.75 %) with positive lymph nodes. Conclusion: HER-2/neu overexpression was not correlated with tumour stage, lymph node metastasis or recurrence of the disease. However, a significant relationship between HER-2/neu overexpression and grade of the bladder TCC tumours was found (P = .002). Further studies with longer follow-up period and a larger sample size can determine the probable role of HER-2/neu expression as a prognostic factor in UCB. Method: A 78-year-old man with histological finding of muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma undergoes cystoprostatectomy. Results: Macroscopically, a rudimentary uterus was discovered along the posterior wall of the bladder. Microscopically, in addition to an urothelial carcinoma, endometrial glands embedded in a compact stroma, next to a vas deferens, were noted. Conclusion: Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) produced by fetal Sertoli cells is responsible for regression of Müllerian ducts. Mutation in AMH gene on chromosome 19p13.3 or abnormality of receptor gene on chromosome 12q13 leads to persistence of the uterus and Fallopian tubes in males. It is transmitted with autosomal recessive or X linked pattern. Patients usually present in childhood with cryptorchidism or with inguinal hernia. These gonads have 15 % risk of germ cell tumours. Treatment of PMDS is surgical and aims to correct cryptorchidism. Careful dissection is required to avoid harming the excretory ducts because frequently the vasa deferentia are embedded in the mesosalpynx, uterine wall and cervix. Removal of the uterus is not recommended. Lack of communication between the testis and excretory ducts and lesions at orchidopexy explain why fertility is rare (11 %). Objective: reveal correlations between vessel malformation and dysnephrogenesis markers in CH. Method: removed kidneys, incision renal biopsies obtained from 63 children from 2 days to 15 years old. We used hematoxylin&eosin, picrofuchsin. Immunohistochemistry: streptavidin-biotin method was made with monoclonal antibodies against VEGF, TGFβ1, TGFβ1 R1 and R2, CD 34, α-SMA. Results: vessel malformation markers were found in all cases: kinking of arteries, defective vessel branching associated with abnormal topography. There were "budding vessels"-arteries with disproportionate small branches. The artery wall thickness was variable, bundles of SMC were oriented chaotically. The closer distances between arteries and veins were often present, these veins had sinusoid-like appearance. Vessel malformation was always associated with parenchymal hypoplasia-closely spaced glomeruli with capillary deficiency and dilated extracapillary spaces, glomerular and tubular cysts, undifferentiated tubules lined with cuboid immature epithelium. We found TGFβ1 and receptor overexpression in immature tubular epithelium and in cytoplasm of hypoplastic longitudinally oriented SMC of UPJ. VEGF expression were present in glomerular endothelium and in nephrocytes. Objective: Hydatid disease (HD) is a rare entity that mostly affects the liver and lung, but almost any organ, forming cysts. We present an unusual case of hydatid cyst found in the retroperitoneum without hepatic or any other involvement. Method: A 33-year-old farmer man presented with right flank pain, nausea and vomiting. Imaging studies revealed a heterogene cystic mass with a diameter of 80 × 70 mm neighbored the superior pole of right kidney. His serology for HD was negative. Total cystectomy was performed. Results: Histological examination revealed cyst wall composed of fibrous and reactive membrane. Reactive membrane showed hyalinized collagen, erosion, degeneration, coagulation necrosis, calcification and focal lymphocyte infiltration. In the necrotic foci, scolices of the cyst were seen and histology confirmed the diagnosis of late stage HD. Conclusion: The diagnosis of HD in an atypical location can be difficult. Histopathological evaluation of the excised specimen usually leads to the diagnosis. As our case, for young patients, symptomatic, solitary, large hydatid peritoneal cysts, surgery is the principal method of treatment. Especially in endemic areas such as Turkey, HD should be suspected in the cases of intraabdominal and retroperitoneal cystic masses. Objective: To compare the clinico-pathologic characteristics and patient outcomes of men with biopsy GS 3 + 4 = 7 without cribriform or intraductal carcinoma (7-) to those with GS 3 + 3 = 6. Method: We included all patients from the first screening round of the European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (1993 Cancer ( -2000 with a revised GS ≤ 3 + 4 = 7 (n = 796) following the 2014 ISUP criteria. Relations with biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy were analyzed using log-rank testing and multivariable Cox regression analysis. Results: In total 486 patients had GS 6 and 310 had GS 7, 54 of whom had GS 7+ (17 %). During a median follow-up of 15 years, biochemical recurrence was seen in 61 (20 %) GS 6, 54 (21 %) GS 7-and 22 GS 7+ patients (41 %). Both biopsy GS 7-and 7+ patients had significantly higher PSA levels, mean tumour percentage, percentage of positive cores and ≥ cT3 than those with GS 6 (all P < .001). GS 7 patients did not have a poorer biochemical-recurrence-free-survival (BCRFS) after radical prostatectomy than GS 6 patients (log rank P = .13), whereas those with GS 7+ had (log rank P = .05). In multivariable analyses, biopsy GS 7-was not associated with poorer BCRFS after radical prostatectomy (P = .47) or radiotherapy (P = .63). GS 7+ was independently associated with poorer BCRFS after radical prostatectomy (P = .03), but not after radiotherapy (P = .67). Conclusion: Men with biopsy GS 7-prostate cancer have similar BCRFS after radical prostatectomy or radiotherapy to those with GS 6 and may be candidates for active surveillance. Expanding histologic spectrum of melanotic Xp11 translocation renal cancer D. Baydar * , E. Ozogul * Hacettepe University, Dept. of Pathology, Ankara, Turkey Objective: Melanotic Xp11 translocation renal cancer (MTRC) is a very rare tumour that belongs to the family of MITF/transcription factor E (TFE) neoplasms. It is a distinctive tumour showing overlapping features between Xp11 translocation renal cell carcinoma, melanoma, and PEComa. Here, we present another case of MTRC, however without melanin production. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of MTRC that lacks melanin. Method: The patient was a 25 year-old female presented with flank pain. A mass at lower-pole of right kidney was identified. Results: Histologically, the tumour was characterized by nests of epithelioid cells which had abundant clear to eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei, and prominent nucleoli. TFE3 expression was identified by immunohistochemistry. There was additional immunoreactivity for HMB45. Actin, desmin, cytokeratins, EMA, CD10, PAX2, PAX-8, S100, melan-A were negative. Findings were consistent with diagnosis of MTRC. But in contrast to formerly described cases, no melanin pigment could be identified in the current tumour. Conclusion: Herein we report a case of MTRC, showing identical features that were described previously except lack of melanin. This report further expands the morphological spectrum of MTRC by showing that it can be amelanotic. The recognition of this histologic presentation should allow for improved diagnosis of this entity. Objective: Cancer stem cells (CSC) represent a population with tumourinitiating, self-renewal, and differentiation potential. The aim of this study was to evaluate CXCR4 expression as a putative CSC marker in Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC). Method: The expression of CXCR4 in specimens from RCC patients was evaluated by immunohistochemistry on a tissue microarray(TMA). One hundred and seventy-three consecutive patients treated surgically for renal cell carcinoma (RCC) between 2010 and 2015 including 106 (61.3 %) Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma (ccRCC), 35(20.2 %) Papillary and 32 (18.5 %) Chromophobe were selected. The association between expression of this marker and tumour characteristics was then analyzed. Results: The mean expression of CXCR4 is significantly different in RCC subtypes (P < 0.000). Increased expression of CXCR4 was significantly correlated with higher grade tumours (P < 0.000) and increase of stage (P = 0.01). The statistically significant association was not found between expression of CXCR4, age and sex and clinicopathologic features of patients including invasion to pelvis, vein, lymph node and tumour size. Conclusion: These findings suggest that CXCR4 can be considered as a valuable tool for the study of renal CSCs and provide a therapeutic target for treatment of the patients with renal cell carcinoma in combination with conventional therapy. Objective: The 2005-Gleason consensus restricted the acceptable morphology for Gleason pattern 3 (GP3) and expanded the spectrum of Gleason pattern 4 (GP4). As a consequence, 3 + 3 tumours are more uniform regarding clinical behavior and those with GP4 are more heterogeneous. We compared different forms of quantifications of GP4 in needle biopsies, and the presence of predominant cribriform morphology in GP4, with subsequent findings in prostatectomy specimens. Method: Seventy-three of needle biopsies with higher Gleason score 6 or 7 were reviewed. Results: The presence of any amount of GP4 (score >6) was associated with higher tumour volumes, higher volume of high grade component (GP4 or 5), positive margins and extraprostatic extensions at prostatectomy specimens. The findings of predominant cribriform morphology in GP4, total linear extension of GP4 > 5 mm, linear extension of GP4 > 2 mm in a single core, more than 2 cores with GP4 or >30 % of involvement by GP4 in a single core were not associated with any relevant finding at prostatectomy. The presence of any amount of GP4 is associated with morphologic features of cancer progression at radical prostatectomies. Decisions for active surveillance based on subclassification of GP4 findings at needle biopsy would be temerarious in our experience. Median of average age was 71,4 (47 to 82), and 2 (28-and 32years-old men) with HIV-associated plasmablastic B-cell TL. 2 patients suffered from prostate cancer. The spread to the adjacent epididymis (19) or spermatic cord (14) was revealed, involving retroperitoneal lymph nodes (9) or inguinal (5) lymph nodes. 4 patients underwent prostate adenomectomy during 2 years before diagnosis of TL, 2 patient had nephrostoma, 1 patient underwent nephrectomy, 1-with hydronephrosis, 3-with ureteropyeloectasis, 1-with chronic pyelonephritis, 5-with renal cysts, 7-with urolithiasis. Conclusion: In spite of the fact that specific clinical and ultrasound features are absent, pre-treatment diagnostic results are not good. The histopathologic spectrum of renal neoplasms seen at the Nairobi hospital over a three year period T. Nyaboga * , W. Waweru * Hospital of Nairobi, Dept. of Pathology, Kenya Objective: To determine the relative frequencies of renal tumours and to analyze their histopathological characteristics in the population studied. Method: This was a retrospective study looking at renal tumours diagnosed in the Pathology department at the Nairobi Hospital over a 3 year period. Surgical specimens from patients who underwent radical nephrectomy/diagnostic-core biopsies provided the tissue samples. Patients' demographic and clinical data was obtained from clinical charts. Two pathologists agreed on the histologic classification. Results: The male-to-female ratio was 1.2:1. The mean age was 49.5 years. Malignant tumours were 85 % of the total. Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) comprised 73 % of the malignant tumours. The other malignant tumours were urothelial carcinoma (18 %) and metastasis (9 %). The subtypes of RCC included; clear-cell RCC, 50 %; papillary-RCC, 25 %; chromophobe-RCC, 12.5 % and RCC-unclassified, 12.5 %. Conclusion: The spectrum of adult renal tumours in this study is consistent with that of previously reported literature. However, RCC presentation is delayed with advanced disease stage. Quantifying subepithelial connective tissue infiltration in bladder urothelial carcinoma in pT1 staging as risk factor of progression and/or relapse Objective: The purpose is to determine whether the quantification of the invasion of subepithelial tissue is a significant predictor of progression and/or relapse and witch method is better to quantify. Method: We present a retrospective study result, in which 214 cases of bladder urothelial carcinoma stage pT1 gotten by TUR were selected. Three methods were used: 1. Rating focal invasion (a single focus to one mm2) vs extensive invasion (more number of focus or major focus larger than one mm2) 2. Quantification in all areas in mm2 3. Determination of the number of foci of invasion. Results: All methods showed no statistically significant differences in the occurrence of relapse but for the occurrence of progression comparing. Focal vs extensive infiltration (p < 0.001, chi-square test), extent of infiltration in mm2 (p < 0.001 Mann-Whitney U-test) and counting invasive foci (p = 0.0009 Mann-Whitney U-test). Conclusion: 1. Quantification of the subepithelial connective tissue invasion by the urothelial carcinoma is an important prognostic factor regarding the progression. 2.As for the onset of relapse, statistically significant differences were not observed. 3. All methods have been proved to be valid for such quantification. Objective: SmCC of the bladder is a malignant neuroendocrine neoplasm of the urothelium that accounts for approximately the 0,5 % of all the malignant bladder tumours. Clinical features (such as haematuria, dysuria and obstructive symptoms) are similar to those of conventional urothelial carcinoma. Majority of patients are men, age of presentation in the sixth or seventh decade of the life and a story of smoking. The differential diagnosis includes poorly differentiated urothelial carcinoma, small cell carcinoma of another site and lymphoma. Method: Our study is based on an observational retrospective study of 7 patients diagnosed, treated and followed for SmCC of the bladder at the University Hospital Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, between 2011 and 2016. Results: All of our patients were men, with an average age of 75,5 years (range 51-94) at the moment of diagnostic. T4 was the most common T stage. The survival average was 2 years after diagnostic. Only two patients are still alive. Conclusion: SmCC of the urinary bladder is an extremely rare malignant neoplasm with neuroendocrine differentiation and an aggresive clinical course. There are no differences in management of SmCC and conventional urothelial carcinoma in our hospital except in metastatic cases. Raman-fluorescence spectroscopy: Applications in diagnostics of prostate cancer S. Avraamova * , N. Aleksandrov, Y. Kirillov * Sechenov First Moscow State Univers., Dept. of Pathological Anatomy, Russia Objective: To evaluate the ability of Raman-fluorescence spectroscopy (RFS) to detect benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) and prostate cancer. Method: We analyzed preoperative result of RFS examination of prostate tissue samples from 62 patients, who later underwent radical prostatectomy. Spectra correlated with histological features and were used to construct diagnostic algorithms. These algorithms were tested to verify their ability to find pathologic regions using Raman-fluorescence spectrum. Results were analyzed according to Gleason grading system and RSA levels. Results: It was established that there is inverse relation between intensity of fluorescence and grade of cancer. Important distinctions between spectra in BPH and prostatic cancer were found in regions with specific vibrations of glycogen molecules, phospholipids, carotenoids and NADH. The results of this study have shown that Ramanfluorescence spectroscopy can be used as accurate and early method of prostate cancer detection. Being safe and inexpensive, RFS is used online and takes only several minutes. It allows to interactively identify tumourous regions pre-and intraoperative and to define volume of surgical intervention with maximum precision. Objective: The aim of this study was to investigate the usability of MUC1 and p53 for differential diagnosis of noninvasive papillary urothelial neoplasias, especially for distinguishing papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential (PUNLMP) from non-invasive papillary urothelial carcinomalow grade (LgPUC) when the histologic signs are not obvious. Method: Seventeen biopsy specimens of the patients with PUNLMP, 20 with LgPUC and 13 with non-invasive papillary urothelial carcinoma, hıgh grdae (HgPUC) were stained for MUC1 and p53 protein by immunohistochemical methods. Histological grading was performed according to an algorithm, which allows histological parameters used in 2016 WHO classification. Results: We had obvious statistical difference for aberrant expression pattern of MUC1 between PUNLMP and LgPUC-HgPUC (p = 0.007). Positivity of MUC1 expression in cytoplasm of basal cells was more observed in HgPUC and LgPUC while PUNLMP was more often showing apical and superficial positivity of MUC1 expression (p = 0.001 and 0.011). Nuclear p53 protein in HgPUC was obviously more frequent than that in LgPUC and PUNLMP (p < 0.001). Measures showed statistical difference among aberrant MUC1 expression, p53 overexpression and tumour grade (p < 0.001). Conclusion: MUC1 and p53 may be helpful immunohistochemical markers for distinguishing PUNLMP from LgPUC and HgPUC, when the histologic signs are not obvious. Prognostic significance and biopsy characteristics of seminal vesicle invasion of prostate cancer: A nationwide registry study A. Kristiansen * , L. Drevin, P. Stattin, L. Egevad * Karolinska Institute, Dept. of Oncological Pathology, Stockholm, Sweden Objective: To evaluate the prognostic significance of seminal vesicle invasion (SVI) or extraprostatic extension (EPE) alone after radical prostatectomy, and to correlate preoperative biopsy pathology with SVI and EPE. Method: The National Prostate Cancer Register includes all prostate cancers diagnosed in Sweden. We analysed 31,415 cases diagnosed between 2000 and 2012 and treated with radical prostatectomy. Associations between pT3a and pT3b and progression were evaluated and adjusted for year, age, biopsy grade and serum PSA. Needle biopsy findings in these stages were compared. Results: Patients with pT3b (n = 1274) had a higher risk of death from any cause [HR 1.54 (95 % CI 1.22-1.95), P = 0.001] than those with pT3a (n = 4097) and were more likely to be treated with postoperative radiotherapy [HR 1.57 (95 % CI 1.39-1.77), P < 0.001] or androgen deprivation therapy [HR 2.94 (95 % CI 2.46-3.50), P < 0.001], indicating clinical progression. Median cancer extent in preoperative biopsies of pT3a and pT3b was 14 and 24 mm (p < 0.001) and Gleason score 8-10 occurred in 11 and 28 % (p < 0.001). Conclusion: SVI of prostate cancer is associated with worse outcome after radical prostatectomy than EPE alone. Needle biopsy findings help to predict SVI, which has major implications in treatment planning. Unusual renal cancer resembling Warthin's tumour K. Okon * , J. Hankus, P. Dudek, P. Chlosta * Jagiellonian University Cracow, Dept. of Pathomorphology, Poland Objective: Current classification of renal tumours includes 15 entities, however pathologist may encounter cases which do not fit well into known categories. We present one such case, with surprising morphology. Method: The material was routinely processed and paraffin embedded. Immunohistochemistry was done by routine manual method. Results: A 66-years old male has been admitted to Urology Department because of tumour of the left kidney, incidentally detected on US. Patient's and family history was non-contributory. Nephrectomy was performed by laparoscopic approach. The post operatory period was uneventful and patient was discharged in good general conditions. On gross examination, a 5 cm tumour was found. Histologically, the tumour was composed of tubules lined by a single layer of epithelial cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and monomorphic nuclei. In most of the tumour stroma, abundant small lymphoid cells were present. This pattern resembled closely Warthin's tumour of the salivary gland. The tumour was limited to the kidney, didn't infiltrate renal sinus, great vessels or renal capsule, and was completely removed. On immunohistochemistry, tumour cells were CK7+, AMACR+, PAX2+, CD56-, WT-, CA9-. Conclusion: To best of our knowledge, this is the first report of tumour with this peculiar morphology and immunophenotype similar to papillary or tubulocystic carcinoma. Objective: Benign prostatic polyps are rare and unusual lesions of the lower urinary tract. They are more commonly observed in the prostatic urethra and less commonly in the urinary bladder, with only a few cases reported in the ureteric orifice. We report a case of a 77-year-old male presented to our hospital with dysuria. Method: Ultrasound revealed hydronephrosis of the right kidney. Ureteroscopy showed a polypoid lesion, 6 cm from the ureteric orifice, protruding into the lumen of the right ureter. Above this lesion the ureter was narrowed, having hard consistency. The polyp was removed. Patient's further image examination thickness of the ureteric wall with indistinct boundaries to the adjacent tissues. Results: The polypoid lesion, measuring 1,5 × 0,2 × 0,1 cm, contained benign glands within a loose stroma and the surface was covered by columnar epithelium and urothelium. The glandular epithelium was PSA immunopositive, confirming the prostatic nature of the polyp. The samples from the ureter and its surrounding soft tissue were negative for malignancy. Conclusion: To our knowledge prostatic polyps presenting in the ureter have not been previously reported in the literature. Prostatic polyps are a common source of hematuria and have been thought to arise from ectopic prostatic tissue but are more likely of hyperplastic-metaplastic nature. Application of Raman-fluorescence spectroscopy for diagnosis of kidney cancer N. Aleksandrov * , S. Avraamova, Y. Kirillov, Y. Poluektov * First Moscow State Medical Univers., Dept. of Pathological Anatomy, Russia Objective: To study laser spectroscopy as a perspective method for distinguishing tumour from intact tissue for early diagnosis of kidney cancer under histological control. Method: Tissue samples from kidney were obtained during radical nephrectomy or partial nephrectomy from 50 patients with kidney cancer. Before the histological examination of tissue the Raman fluorescence spectroscopy images were obtained. The study was conducted using a Raman analyzer consisting of Olympus microscope combined with a spectrometer InSpectr R532. The samples with high intensity in fingerprint regions: carotenoids (1157 cm-1, 1517 cm-1), aminoacid phenylalanine (1003 cm-1) and methionine (2655 cm-1) were interpreted as suspicious for cancer, and underwent the histological examination which revealed clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC) in all samples. Malignancy grade was determined according to classification of S. Fuhrman et al. The results of histologic examination of kidney tissue correlated with the data obtained with Raman fluorescence spectroscopy in 42 cases (84 %) from 50, however, it showed no correlation between the degree of tumour differentiation and the intensity of Raman-fluorescence. Conclusion: Raman-fluorescence spectroscopy has high sensitivity for early detection of malignancies but it needs to be studied more to evaluate its ability for different types of tumours. Papillary adenoma of the kidney A. Calió * , K. A. Warfel, J. N. Eble * University of Verona, Dept. of Pathology, Italy Objective: To study small neoplasms of the epithelium of the renal tubules. Method: Kidneys from 402 unselected autopsies were sectioned at 1 to 2 mm intervals and all lesions were examined histologically. Results: 232 papillary adenomas were found in 76 patients (19 %), ranging from 1 to 35 tumours/patient (mean 3, median 2). Patients with papillary adenomas were older (range 27-90 years) (p < 0.0001), more commonly smokers (p = 0.01) and associated with glomerulosclerosis (p = 0.0001) than those without. Papillary adenomas ranged in size from 0.5 to 5 mm (mean 1.4, median 1) and were morphologically classified in four subtypes. Adenomas consisting of papillae and/or tubules covered by cells with scant cytoplasm, often with psammoma bodies were the most common (149 tumours), 16 were composed of large eosinophilic cells with pseudostratified nuclei, occasionally near to the apical membrane, in 30 the papillae were broad with lymphocytes in the core, and 30 were more cystic lined by columnar cells and containing macrophages and psamomma bodies. Four were unclassified. Mixtures of types within the same tumour were rare (3 in 1 patient). Conclusion: The first type corresponds well to papillary renal cell carcinoma, type 1 and the second to type 2; the others do not correspond to known carcinomas. Objective: To elucidate the morphology and clinical correlations of renomedullary interstitial cell tumours (RMICTs). Method: Kidneys from 402 unselected autopsies were sectioned at 1 to 2 mm intervals and all lesions were examined histologically. Results: 421 RMICTs were found in 150 patients, ranging from 1 to 23 tumours/patient (mean 3). There was no significant difference in age, gender, hypertension, heart weight, smoking, diabetes, or renal function between patients with RMICTs and without. Fifty-two percent of patients with RMICTs were older than 60 years (range 18-92). Forty-one percent had bilateral tumours and they were older than patients with unilateral tumours (p = 0.0007). The tumours ranged in size from 0.5 to 6 mm (mean 1.7). Renal tubules throughout the tumour was found in younger patients and smaller tumours while the absence of entrapped tubules or their location at the periphery was common in older patients and larger tumours (p = 0.02 and p < 0.0001). Amyloid-like material was common in older patients (p < 0.0001) and in larger tumours (p < 0.0001) and correlated with higher heart weight (p = 0.003) but not with hypertension (p = 0.11). Conclusion: RMICTs appear to originate as a proliferation of renomedullary interstitial cells entrapping renal tubules. As size increases, cellularity decreases, amyloid-like material is deposited and tubules disappear. Ten patients were males and four were females with a mean age of 57.28 years. Ten patients had radical nephrectomy, three had nephroureterectomy and only one had partial nephrectomy. Microscopic examination confirmed the diagnosis of verrucous SCC in three cases and classic SCC in 11 of them. The latter type was well differentiated in seven cases and moderately differentiated in only two. Seven tumours showed necrosis. Invasion of the renal vein existed in two cases. Chronic pyelonephritis was found in all cases. According to the WHO classification system, eight tumours were staged as pT4, three as pT3, two as pT1 and one as pTis. Five patients had metastasis. The death rate was 1OO% after 5 years. Conclusion: The prognosis of PSCCRP is generally poor. Early diagnosis and monitoring of patients with long-standing nephrolithiasis is needed to improve patient outcomes. Glomerulocystic kidney presenting as a unilateral kidney mass in an infant with tuberous sclerosis: Report of a case and review of the literature M. Rito * , R. Adame Cabrera * Instituto Portugues de Oncologia de Lisboa, Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Portugal Objective: The association between cystic kidney disease and the tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is well known, but its presentation as a unilateral mass with glomerulocystic pattern is rare. We describe a case of an infant with a prenatal diagnosis of TSC, with a renal mass that was believed to be a renal tumour. Method: The clinical, radiological and histopathological findings of a case of TSC associated glomerulocystic kidney (GCK) are described, with a review of the literature. Results: A 4-month-old infant with maternal history of TSC and prenatally diagnosed subependymal nodules and a right renal mass underwent nephrectomy. Histopathology revealed a segmental GCK with epithelial hyperplasia of the tubules and cysts. A diagnosis of TSC associated GCK was rendered. Eight other cases with similar histopathological findings were found in the literature, two of which presented as a localized mass. Conclusion: We've described a case of a rare TSC associated cystic kidney lesion. Awareness of the entity and its presentation as a localized mass may aid in the differential diagnosis of renal masses in infants. The hyperplastic tubular epithelium found in ours and other reported cases seems so characteristic that may serve as a major clue for the diagnosis of TSC. Objective: Renal tuberculosis (RT) is the most frequent extra pulmonary TB disease and continues to be a major health problem in Tunisia. We propose in this study to review the clinical and histological characteristics of RT. Method: This is a retrospective study over a period of 26 years from January 1990 to December 2015. Clinical data were reviewed for each patient and the following parameters were evaluated: gender, age at diagnosis, initial clinical symptoms and site of onset and histological features of the lesion. Results: A total of 100 patients with histologically proven cases of RT were included. The majority were females 54 %, with a mean age of 48 years (ranges from 18 to 83). Symptoms were polymorphic: chronic renal failure 80 %; chronic pyelonephritis 15 %; urinary tract infections 3 %; renal mass 3 %. Twenty percent of patients had a history of extrarenal tuberculosis. The left kidney was the most affected site 60 %. We assessed an association to a clear cell carcinoma, an oncocytoma and an urothelial carcinoma. Conclusion: RT is characterized, in our country, by the importance of its frequency and the polymorphism of its clinical manifestations. Pathologists must be aware of this pathology that must be suspected in every renal specimen. Objective: Clear cell papillary renal cell carcinoma (CCPRCC) is a novel tumour entity that was recently recognized as a new distinct epithelial tumour within the current classification system. It is composed of cells with clear cytoplasm lining cystic, tubular, and papillary structures. The aim is to elucidate the spectrum of morphologic and immunohistochemical findings of a new recent entity. Method: A 67-year-old man with no history of End stage renal disease was admitted to our medical center with right flank pain. An ultrasound scan revealed a mass in the right kidney. His subsequent computed tomography scan revealed a mass on right kidney, measured 4.5 cm diameter. Patient underwent right nephrectomy. He was discharged at postoperative third day, without any complication. Results: On macroscopic examination, the tumour was solid and yellowbrown color. On microscopy examination, the tumour showed mixed areas of tubular and papillary structures. The papillae are covered with a single layer of clear cells with low-grade nuclei. The nuclei exhibit a characteristic linear arrangement away from the basal aspect of cells. Foamy macrophages, tumour necrosis, and vascular invasion are not seen. The tumour cells were positive for CK7 and negative for P504 and CD10. The diagnosis of CCPRCC was retained. Conclusion: CCPRCC may pose diagnostic difficulties, where it may be mistaken for RCC with clear cell and papillary features. Attention to gross and histologic features, and appropriate immunohistochemical and molecular studies, should help distinguish CCPRCC from its mimickers. Objective: Pleomorphic adenoma (PA) is the most common benign neoplasm of the salivary gland, which can rarely metastasize without malignant transformation. Metastasizing pleomorphic adenoma (MPA) is indistinguishable from PA, yet produces secondary tumours in distant sites. Here we report a case of a MPA of the kidney 13 years after lateral parotidectomy for pleomorphic adenoma. Method: A 43-years-old woman presented with haematuria. Subsequent abdominal computed tomography revealed a solitary cystic lesion in left kidney. A renal carcinoma was suspected and a radical nephrectomy was performed. Results: Surgical specimen showed a grey-white cystic lesion located in the upper pole of the kidney. The lesion protruded from the cortical surface. Microscopically showed a mixed cell composition with epithelial component consisting of sheets and duct-like structures, as well as mesenchymal elements with chondroid differentiation. Conclusion: Metastasizing pleomorphic adenoma to the kidney is a rare and poorly understood neoplasm and requires a careful patient history. Metastatic disease should be treated surgically when feasible, but the best therapy still remains unresolved. It appears worthwhile to look for any peculiar histology or molecular features to help predict its metastases. In this study, we analyzed 5 pure adult YST and 3 pediatric YST using a 397-gene analysis panel to identify putative pathways in tumour development. Method: DNA sequences were enriched with custom Agilent hybrid capture probe set, then sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 using 101 bp reads. A custom bioinformatics pipeline was used to identify variants and query the 1000 Genomes database to aid in the identification of germline variants and the COSMIC and cBioportal databases for known cancer association(s). SIFT and PolyPhen-2 predictions were used to evaluate variants of uncertain significance (VUS). Results: Adult YST showed a total of 246 genomic variants. Somatic variants were filtered for known or likely deleterious effects; 15 genes harbored clinically significant (CS) mutations or variants of unknown significance (VUS) in a subset of cases. These genes and associated pathway members also showed germline variation in the remaining patients, with protein prediction suggesting a putative effect on protein function. Frequently altered genes include those involved in histone modification and DNA mismatch repair. Alterations in adherens junction/Wnt/APC pathway, splicing factor changes, and voltage-gated ion channel genes were also observed. Two known oncogenic mutations were identified: KRAS p.K117N, a signal transduction GTPase and CTNNB1 p.D32V, a transcription factor. The 3 pediatric YST showed a total of 101 variants, which were distinct from adult YST. Conclusion: Our data suggests that unique defects in DNA repair and altered histone modification are common in adult pure YST and may contribute to the pathogenesis of this unusual tumour. Objective: Serous carcinoma can occasionally involve the bladder wall. We analyzed 21 patients with bladder wall involvement by serous carcinoma and highlight a subset of cases that lacked typical features and mimicked urothelial carcinoma (UCa). Method: H&E slides were reviewed and immunohistochemical stains for CK7, WT-1, PAX-8, GATA-3, CK 7, p63 and p53 were performed. Results: Patients age ranged from 44 to 80 year (average 62 years). Genitourinary symptoms included hematuria, hydronephrosis, and urinary retention; a bladder mass was the initial presentation in 4 patients (19 %). CA-125 was increased in 14 patients. In 16 cases imaging confirmed the presence of a pelvic mass. A concurrent or recent history of serous carcinoma involving the ovary (n = 16), endometrium (n = 3), or fallopian tube (n = 2) was reported and these cases showed classic histological features of high grade serous carcinoma. Psammomatous calcification was seen in 8 cases. Stromal reaction including desmoplasia and fibrosis was seen in 16 cases. However, a subset of cases lacked classic features of serous carcinoma and showed morphologic overlap with UCa, including nested architecture (n = 5), squamous differentiation (n = 2), spindle cell features (n = 2), poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (n = 3), and lymphoepithelioma-like features (n = 1). Four cases showed full thickness involvement of the bladder wall, including colonization of the urothelial lining. Conclusion: Serous carcinoma of the gynecologic tract rarely presents a diagnostic challenge. However, occasional cases with full thickness and involvement of the bladder wall, a remote history of gynecologic cancer, or colonization of the urothelial surface can mimic UCa. Objective: A method comparison study for the performance (staining intensity) of rabbit monoclonal anti-P504S antibody (clone SP116) relative to widely used on-market clone (13H4). Method: A total of 180 tissues were stained for this study (58 normal and 122 neoplastic), including a mix of prostate (81) and non-prostate (99). The list of tissues to be stained for the study was derived from multiple published sources to include normal and neoplastic tissues with various expected levels of expression. Tissues were qualified by a pathologist using H&E. As this was a study to characterize the rate of positivity in the tissues being tested, there were no overall acceptance criteria as an outcome for this study. The stained P504S slides for both clones were blinded and scored independently by two pathologists. Results: The scoring data for staining intensity and background were analyzed by paired p-test analysis for each pathologist separately and combined across all tissues stained. All p-values are significant (<0.05) and in each case, the SP116 has higher mean staining intensity than the 13H4 clone used in this study, both by pathologist overall and by tissue category. The paired p-test analysis for background staining between the two clones was statistically equivocal in this study. Conclusion: Rabbit monoclonal antibody to P504S, clone SP116, demonstrated staining that was equivalent or better across the tissues stained. Objective: Immunohistochemical expression of GATA-3 is characteristic of breast and urothelial carcinomas. We have analysed GATA-2 expression in normal and neoplastic prostate and compared it with 34βE12 cytokeratin staining. Method: 68 samples of needle prostate biopsies (32 benign and 36 adenocarcinomas) were studied. One section of each simple was doublestained for GATA-3 and 34βE12, using an automatic stainer (Ventana). Another section was stained with GATA-3 duplicating the heating epitope retrieval time. Results: Both GATA-3 and 34βE12 stained basal cells (3+), except in 5 cases (7,3 %) that showed foci only positive for GATA-3. In 48,95 % of our cases, GATA-3 also stained secretory cells. 1 of the 36 adenocarcinomas was GATA-3 positive (10 % of the cells) while all of them were negative for 34βE12 as expected. The two different antigen retrieval protocols for GATA-3 yielded similar results. Conclusion: GATA-3 is strongly expressed by the basal cells of the prostate. There is no significant difference in the extent and the intensity of staining of GATA-3 compared to 34βE12 staining. GATA-3 may also stain secretory cells, and in very rare cases of prostate adenocarcinomas there be focal positive immunoreactivity. The application of two different antigen retrieval protocols did not produce differences in the staining. Profile of cancer of the prostate in Rwanda: Demographics, diagnosis, gleason score and prognostic grading T. Zawadi Muvunyi * , E. Ngendahayo, E. Rwamasirabo, R. Kalengayi * University of Rwanda, Dept. of Pathology, Kigali, Rwanda Objective: To determine the profile of cancer of the prostate in Rwanda in regard to demographics, diagnosis, Gleason score and prognostic grading. Method: A total of 120 cases of prostate cancer diagnosed at King Faisal Hospital (KFH), from 2010 to 2015, were retrieved together with clinical data. All cases were reviewed on H&E stain and Gleason score and grading were given using the criteria of the International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP), 2014. Results: Age range: 55-96 years; mean age: 70.95 years. Age groups; 61-70 years (42 %) and 71-80 years (33 %) were predominating. About 60 % of patients presented with LUTS/BOO. Only 14 % consulted because of raised PSA. About 50 % had hard nodular prostate on DRE. PSA was raised in 95 % of the cases before sample collection. Gleason score 9-10 (prognostic grade group V); Gleason score 4 + 3 = 7 (prognostic grade group III); Gleason score 4 + 4 = 8 (prognostic grade group (IV) were 40, 26 and 23 % respectively. Conclusion: The majority of our patients presented with advanced disease. There is need to increase awareness on prostate cancer screening. Objective: The aim of this study is to outline the pathological features of uncommon variants of urothelial carcinoma (UC) in a retrospective study. These variants have diagnostic, therapeutic, and prognostic significance. Method: All bladder transurethral resections (BTUR) performed for bladder cancer suspicion in the pathology department of Tîrgu-Mureș county hospital between 2004 and 2015 were reviewed. UCs were classified according to the 2004 WHO classification. Detailed morphological descriptions were used to diagnose uncommon histological UC variants; sometimes immunohistochemical profile was sought to refine the diagnosis. The corresponding pathological results on cystectomy were also available. Results: Of 2432 UCs, 151 had divergent differentiation. In descending order, the uncommon variants of UCs were: micropapillary (18), sarcomatoid (12), plasmacitoid (3), inverted UC (2), microcystic (2), nested (2), UC with synciotrophoblastic-cells (1), with villo-glandular differentiation (1), or with osteoclast-type giant cells (1) . With only one exception, all these variants were associated with high grade and/or invasive UCs. Unlike other variants, the micropapillary variant had a higher pathological stage at presentation and was more frequently associated with lymphovascular invasion. Conclusion: Awareness of uncommon variants of UC is critical in avoiding misdiagnosis. Their presence should be mentioned in pathological reports because they may have different clinical outcomes or therapeutic approaches. Expression of putative cancer stem cell markers CD44 and CD133 in prostate carcinomas: A tissue microarray study of Iranian patients M. Asgari * , E. Kalantari, S. Nikpanah, N. Salarieh, Z. Madjd * Oncopathology Research Center, Tehran, Iran Objective: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are the main players of prostate tumourigenesis and characterization of CSCs can pave the way for understanding the early detection, drug resistance, metastasis and relapse. Therefore, the current study was conducted to evaluate the expression level and clinical significance of the potential CSC markers CD44 and CD133 in a series of prostate tissues. Method: One hundred and forty-eight prostate tissues composed of prostate cancer (PCa), high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN), and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) immunostained for the putative CSC markers CD44 and CD133. Then the correlation between the expression of these markers and the clinicopathological variables was examined. Results: Higher level of CD44 expression was observed in 42 % of PCa, 57 % of HGPIN, and 44 % BPH tissues. In the case of CD133 expression PCa, HGPIN, and BPH samples demonstrated high immunoreactivity in 46, 43, and 42 % of cells, respectively. There was an inverse significant correlation between CD44 expression with a Gleason score of (P = 0.02), while there was no significant correlation between CD133 expression and clinicopathological parameters. Conclusion: Our results showed higher expression of both putative cancer stem cell markers, CD44 and CD133, almost in half of the prostate cases, while higher level of CD44 expression was observed significantly in PCa cases with lower Gleason score. Considering controversial findings regarding expression of CD44 and CD133 and their clinical significance, these markers still could not be counted as definite markers of CSCs for the development of new therapeutic strategies for PCs. Langerhans cell histiocytosis within a clear cell renal cell carcinoma M. Bonert * , C. Lemieux, A. Kapoor * Objective: Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare proliferative disorder that is seldom found in the kidney. Method: Herein, we report of a 54 year old asymptomatic woman treated for a small renal mass with a partial nephrectomy that was found to have LCH within a clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC). Results: The CCRCC had a classical histomorphology (clear cells, chicken-wire like vessels, solid with some cystic and tubular areas) and this was supported by immunostains (positive: CD10, RCC, E-cadherin; negative: CD117, CK7, CK34betaE12, colloidal iron, CD68, S-100, CD1a and CD207). Likewise, the LCH also had a classic histomorphology (cerebri from nuclei, intermixed with eosinophils) and had characteristic immunostaining (positive: CD68, S-100, CD1a and CD207). Molecular testing of the LCH cells demonstrated the presence of a BRAF p.V600E missense mutation. Conclusion: The surgical margins were clear and on follow-up the patient is well 6 months post-surgery without evidence of recurrence on cross-sectional imaging. Our patient did not have a history of LCH and is a short duration (7.5 years) ex-smoker. To our knowledge this is the third reported case of LCH in the kidney in association with RCC, and the second without a prior history of LCH. Objective: Atypical small acinar proliferation (ASAP) is a diagnoses that occurs in about 1-2 % of prostate biopsies. Within a 5-year period, approximately 30-40 % of patients with ASAP may develop cancer. Guidelines recommend a repeat biopsy within 3-6 months after the initial diagnosis. Our objective was to examine if there is an association between ASAP and high grade prostate cancer, challenge the need for immediate repeat biopsy. Method: A retrospective multi-institutional review identified 83 patients who underwent prostate biopsy between 2007 and 2016 and were diagnosed with ASAP. Clinicopathologic features were analyzed. Results: All 83 patients had a repeat biopsy. 18/83 were subsequently diagnosed with prostate cancer. 2 were high grade prostate cancer. 7 was Gleason 3 + 3, 7 was Gleason 3 + 4, 2 was Gleason 4 + 3, 1 was Gleason 4 + 4, 1 was Gleason 5 + 4. Radical prostatectomy was performed on 10 patients, 1 had TUR-P. Preoperative tPSA is significantly higher than the following one. Conclusion: Only 4 patients have high grade (8 ≥ Gleason grade, 83 were ASAP on initial diagnosis. İmmediate repeat biopsy may be safely delayed. What is the significance of rete testis invasion by malign germ cell tumour and does hilum predicts metastasis? A. N. Ihvan * , C. Ediz * Umraniye Training and Research Center, Dept. of Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey Objective: The significance of rete testis, hiler soft tissue invasion in malign germ cell tumours is stil controversial on current guidelines. We investigated the predictors of metastatic disease at presentation on malign germ cell tumours. Method: Methods: 59 radical orchiectomy specimens were re-evaluated at Umraniye Training and Research Hospital and Uskudar State Hospital between 2007 and 2015. Results: From 59 malign germ cell tumours; 26 patients were seminomatous, 33 were nonseminomatous. Mean patients age was 38,54 years (range, 17-89 years). Follow-up in formation was available in 50 patients with known rete testis and vascular invasions tatus. Mean follow-up duration was 39,84 months (range 3-96). Serum tumour marker levels are associated with rete testis invasion (p:0,035). Hiler soft tissue is significantly associated with vascular invaison (p0,001). Vascular invasion is significantly associated with metastasis as expected (p0,024). Conclusion: We conclude that, there is a strong association between hiler soft tissue and vascular invasion. Hiler soft tissue should be reported on routine pathology reporting. Although we could not exhibit the significance of rete invasion, more information is needed. Comparative morphology analysis of kidneys at different kinds of implants in nephropexy: Experimental study A. Abatova * , M. Tusupbecova, N. Abatov, J. Alberton, E. Assamidanov * Objective: Experimental evaluate the structural changes different types of implants with rats' kidney. Method: 84 rats were divided into 3 groups. The first groups were rats with decellularized xenoperitoneum. Two control groups -partially absorbable lightweight mesh"UltraPro" and fascia-peritoneum graft were used. The kidney was resected on the 7th, 14th, 30th days and processed for histological analysis. Criterias were neovasculasitation, lymphoid infiltration and formation of sclerotic tissue. For morphological assessment was done using heamatoxyline-eosin. Results: The first group, on 7th day there were vascularization, lymphoid infiltration and formation of granulation tissue. At 14 day infiltration by lymphocytes were observed; on 30th days have been identified of reactive changes and the development of sclerotic processes.In both control groups on the 7th day there were diffuse lymphoid reaction.On14th day formation of granulation tissue were marked. On 30th day growth of fiber connective tissue,adhesions, reactive inflammation were registered. The performed investigation could recommend decellularized xenoperitoneum, which are most adequate for tissue in nephropexy. Biomaterial are characterized by less progressive fiber connective process, reactive inflammation compared to controls group. Objective: Gleason scoring is the grading system which strongly predicts the prognosis of prostate cancer. However; even being one of the most commonly used systems, the presence of different interobserver agreement rates push the uropathologists update the definitions of the Gleason patterns. In this study, we aimed to determine the interobserver agreement variability among 7 general pathologists and 1 expert uropathologist from 6 different centers. Method: A set of 50 HE stained slides from 41 patients diagnosed as prostate cancer were revised by 8 different pathologists. The pathologists were also grouped according to being students in the same institute or working in the same center. All pathologists' and the subgroups' Gleason scores were then compared for interobserver variability by Fleiss' and Cohen's kappa tests using R V3.2.4. This study was supported by a project from the Scientific Research Projects Management Unit of Mugla Sıtkı Kocman University (Grant number: 15/086). Results: Eight pathologists from 6 different centers revised all the slides. One of them was an expert uropathologist with experience of 18 years. Among 7 general pathologists 4 were working over 5 years whilst 3 were under 5 years. The Fleiss' kappa was found as 0,4828 for primary pattern; 0,3597 for secondary pattern and 0,4929 for total Gleason score which means moderate agreement. Conclusion: Assigning Gleason score is a problematic system causing different interobserver agreement rates among pathologists even though the patterns were accepted as well-defined. Evaluation of prognostic sub-classifications T1a/b and T1m/e in T1 bladder cancer M. Bucau * , E. Xylinas, B. Terris, M. Sibony * Hôpital Cochin, Dept. de Pathologie, Paris, France Objective: Several predictors of recurrence and progression of T1 bladder cancer have been proposed including the sub-staging of T1 stage. The aim was to assess sub-stadifications in a single-center patient's series. Method: One hundred and seventy two T1 bladder tumours were classified according to the two sub-stadifications systems, T1a/T1b (superficial /deep lamina propria invasion) and T1m/e (invasion in a single focus within one HPF/other T1). Uni-and multivariable analyses were performed in order to assess the association of these classifications with disease recurrence/progression. Results: A modification of the m/e system was proposed : T1M (invasion in one or multiples focus within one HPF each) and T1E (invasion above one HPF). Median follow-up was 5years. Objective: To evaluate intra-and peritumoural LVD through immunohistochemical expression of D2-40 in relation to claudin-4 expression and clinicopathological parameters in prostatic adenocarcinoma. Method: Immunohistochemical staining procedure was performed on 53 paraffin-embedded blocks of radical prostatectomy specimens for prostatic adenocarcinoma using anti D2-40 and claudin-4 antibodies. Sections were evaluated for mean LVD in intratumoural and peritumoural tissues assessed by D2-40 expression. Results: LVD in intratumoural tissues was significantly lower compared with peritumoural areas (P = .0001). Peritumoural mean LVD was significantly higher in cases with lymphovascular invasion (P = .041) and in cases with positive lymph node metastasis (P = .003) than intratumoural mean LVD. High claudin-4 expression was significantly correlated with high tumour grade (P = .0001), lymphovascular invasion (P = .006), and positive lymph node metastasis (P = .004). High claudin-4 expression was significantly associated with increased mean LVD in peritumoural tissues. Conclusion: Increased peritumoural mean LVD in prostatic adenocarcinoma is associated with lymphovascular invasion and positive lymph node metastasis. High claudin-4 expression is associated with high tumour grade, lymphocascular invasion, positive lymph node metastasis, and high mean peritumoural LVD suggesting that D2-40 and claudin-4 may represent different mechanisms of lymphatic vessel invasion with both biomarkers is related to poor prognosis. Objective: Underlying aims of this study was decumanting the histopathological and clinical features, recurrence and progression of the bladder urothelial carcinoma(UC). Method: In our study 554 diagnosed transurethral resection material were analyzed retrospectively in the pathology laboratory of two university hospitals, between 2006 and 2014 years. Results: 554 patients were followed median 17.5 months (minimum 1 month, maximum 162 months). Their estimated mean survival was 121.7 months. According to log rank analysis, gender (p = 0.955) presence of differentiation(p = 0.523), primer (p = 0.351) did not show statistically significant effect on survival but age (estimated mean is 138.9 months in 65 and younger, 110.1 months over 65 years old, p = 0.018), grade, microscobic tumour infiltration, configuration were statistically significant, (p < 0.001). According to Cox regression analysis, age (p = 0.009) and grade are most important determinants of survival. Invasive tumours into muscularis propria have significantly bad prognosis compared to non-infiltrative tumours (p < 0.001). Conclusion: Early dignosis can reduce the morbidity and mortality in urothelial carcinomas. Standard urologic evaluation, urinary cytology, ultrasound scanning, contrast urography and cystoscopy, in addition to coordinated efforts between pathologists and urologists should aid early detection and diagnosis of precursor lesions. Objective: Characterize the morphological spectrum of mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma (MTSCC) and underline some diagnostic pitfalls. Method: Clinicopathological re-evaluation of MTSCC cases diagnosed at Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto (IPO-P) and literature review. Demographics, morphology, immunohistochemical study and main differential diagnosis were noted. Results: Two MTSCC were retrieved. Both were from women, with 59 and 73 years, within the reported gender predominance and age range (13-81). One tumour presented classic morphology, low nuclear grade and only focal papillations; differential diagnosis included papillary (solid variant) renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and sarcomatoid change in RCC. Conversely, the other tumour was predominanty composed by spindled cell component; presented a higher nuclear grade and numerous cells with clear or vacuolated cytoplasm; differential diagnosis included mainly clear cell RCC with sarcomatoid change. Indeed, a clear cell RCC diagnosis was rendered in pre-surgery core-biopsy. Sarcomatoid change, seldom described in MTSCC reported cases (<10 %), was absent in our cases. Both tumours were kidney confined and displayed CK7 (multifocal) and vimentin immunostaining. Conclusion: MTSCC is a rare renal tumour that might present a broad spectrum of morphologic appearances. Awareness of these uncommon morphologies might be determinant to achieve correct diagnosis and immunohistochemistry might be helpful in difficult cases. Objective: Papillary renal cell carcinoma (PRCC) is the second most common type of renal cell carcinoma and is morphologically separated into 2 subtypes. We reviewed the clinicopathological and immunohistochemical features of 15 cases. Method: Clinical records, histopathological and immunohistochemical slides of PRCC from our archive from 2003 to 2016. Results: Of a total of 188 cases, 15 PRCC cases were identified (6 type 1, 8 type 2, and 1 mixed), 11 male and 4 female. Mean age was 59.8 years for type 1 and 58.6 years for type 2. Mean tumour size was 3.1 cm for type 1 and 3.3 cm for type 2. Type 2 tumours had higher nuclear grade than type 1 tumours. Mean follow-up was 36 months . Based on follow-up data, both subtypes have an excellent prognosis when diagnosed at an early stage. One patient with locally advanced type 2 PRCC died of disease after 22 months. Immunohistochemical profiles of both subtypes were similar. Conclusion: There is a significant overlap in the clinicopathological and immunohistochemical features of both subtypes of PRCC. The presence of mixed histology suggests that there is a continuum between these 2 types. The follow-up data in this study suggests that mortality from the tumour is low. Objective: This retrospective study examined a cohort of 1870 men treated by radical prostatectomy (RP) for CaP between 1993 through 2016 to analyze trends in stage and grade migration at diagnosis over time. Method: CaP pathologic stage and grade were determined on whole mount prostate specimens in an ongoing, prospective, longitudinal cohort study military patients, a participating center in the Center for Prostate Disease. Grading was re-evaluated retrospectively using the 2016 ISUP revised grade group score (GG). Results: From 1993 to 2008, the largest tumour dimension (LTD) decreased from 2.5 ± 0.9 ± to 1.8 ± 0.8 cm (p < 0.0001), while the proportions of extraprostatic extension (EPE) decreased from 50 to 28 % (p < 0.0001), seminal vesicle invasion (SVI) from 20 to 3 % (p < 0.0001) and pT4 spread from 3 to 0.2 % (p < 0.0001). After a plateau, the LTD rose between 2012 to 2016 from 1.2 ± 0.8 to 2.1 ± 0.8 (p < 0.0001), EPE from 23 to 34 % (p = 0.005), and SVI from 5 and 13 % (v = 0.001). The mean GG declined from 3.1 ± 1.3 in 1993 to 2.5 ± 1.4 in 2005 (p < 0.0001) and then, after a plateau, rose from 2009 to 2016 from 2.3 ± .07 to 3.1 ± .08 (p = 0.01). Conclusion: In this large prospective cohort of patients with comparable health care access, there were significant time-dependent CaP pathologic stage and grade migrations, which followed somewhat different time courses. A possible link between these trends and changes in PSA screening or treatment interventions with curative intent warrants further examination. Predicting the BCG response in bladder urothelial carcinoma: Utility of the Th2/Th1 ratio in peritumoural lymphocytes A. Hernández Gallego * , P. Vargas Ramos, M. López, R. Martínez Rodríguez, C. Cabrera, G. Tapia Melendo Objective: The mechanism of bladder carcinoma control after treatment with intravesical BCG is unknown and no reliable predictor of response is available. BCG is a potent immunomodulator that polarizes the immune reaction towards a Th1 response. Our aim is to determine the type of immune response (Th1 or Th2) in peritumoural stromal lymphocytes of patients with high grade urothelial carcinoma, non-muscle invasive, before treatment and to establish if immune response type pre-treatment conditions the subsequent clinical response. Method: We evaluated tumour tissue obtained by diagnostic transurethral resection from 19 patients who subsequently received treatment with BCG, classified as responders (n = 11) and non-responders (n = 8). We determined the number of Th1 lymphocytes (T-bet+) and Th2 lymphocytes (GATA-3+) by immunohistochemistry. Results: Responders (Rs) to BCG treatment showed more Th2 lymphocytes and fewer Th1 lymphocytes (average: 151 and 28 cells/field, respectively) than non-responders (NRs) (average: 93 and 46, respectively). The Th2/Th1 ratio was significantly higher in Rs compared with NRs. The presence of Th1 lymphocytes in peritumoural stroma before BCG therapy is associated with a lack of response to BCG. Determination of the Th2/Th1 ratio could be used as a predictive marker of BCG treatment response. Objective: Non-urothelial bladder tumours are rare and still diagnostic challenging entities. We aim to make a judgeful correlation between morphologic types and age groups, that can guide towards a better understanding of this pathology. Method: We analysed 110 cases of non-urothelial bladder neoplasias out of 756 bladder tumours diagnosed in our unit between 2006 and 2015. We received the material as 29 cistectomy specimens and 81 transurethral resection fragments (TURs). The patients were 23 females and 87 males with a mean age of 67 years (ranging from 24 to 89 years old). Imunostains were used in 29 cases to complete the diagnose. Results: In the younger age group (24-60 years old) we diagnosed 15 secondary tumours (50 %) and 15 (50 %) primary tumours represented by 4 adenocarcinomas, 3 sarcomatoid, 3 undifferentiated and 2 squamous carcinomas, a PEC-oma, a paraganglioma and an atypical leiomyoma. In the older age group (60-89 years old), we diagnosed 51 secondary tumours (63.7 %) and 29 primary tumours (56.3 %) represented by 9 undifferentiated/unelucidated, 8 squamous and 6 sarcomatoid carcinomas, 3 adenocarcinomas, 2 neuroendocrine and a lymphoepithelial carcinoma. Conclusion: Younger patients could be prone to developing nonurothelial primary tumours that should be carefully taken into consideration in the differential diagnosis. Objective: Urothelial bladder carcinoma (UBC) is a cause of significant morbidity and mortality in the Western world and an illness mostly diagnosed in elderly patients. The aim of the study is to evaluate pathological characteristics of UBC in young patients diagnosed and treated in our centre. Method: We performed a retrospective study to identify patients ≤45 years of age on initial diagnosis of UBC. Our review covers the clinicopathological data for a period of 5 years. The exclusion criteria for the study was a diagnosis of non-urothelial tumours. Results: From a total number of 748 patients with UBC, we have selected a number (n = 18) that met our selection criteria (age). The cohort consisted of 17 males and 1 female, with a mean age of 40.8 years, with the youngest patient being 29 years of age. Out of 18 UBCs, 3 cases were PUNLMP (16.6 %), 6 cases low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma (33.3 %) and 9 cases high-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma (50 %). Initial staging of the lesions showed: 9 pTa cases, 7 pT1 cases, 1 pT2 case and 1 pT3 case. On follow-up, 4 patients presented with local recurrences and progression of the tumour. Conclusion: UBC in young patients presented histopathological features similar to the one found in the elderly population. Our results showed a male predominance and therefore we suggest the necessity for implementing screening guidelines for the atrisk young population. Objective: Urothelial carcinoma of the upper tract (UTUC) or the bladder (UCB) share common risks associated factor. We investigated and compared genomic aberration (GA) in urothelial carcinoma in both localisations in order to find specific alteration. Method: Frozen tissues from 13 UCB (4 pTa, 5 pT1 and 4 pT2) and 16 UTUC (5 pTa, 6 pT1 and 5 pT2) were subject to comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH) with the BCA-1 assay design for urothelial carcinoma. Results: pTa UCB have more frequent GA than UTUC (16 vs 13 %) and show any amplification (0 vs 6 %). In both origins GA were more frequent in T2 carcinoma (UBC 17 % and UTUC 23 %). Some specifics GA were found: 16q deletion for UCB, 21q amplification for UTUC, 4pq alteration in pT2, 5q amplification in pT2 UCB. Conclusion: With a specific CGH array for urothelial carcinoma we found GA presents only in UCB or UTUC and also others only in muscle invasive carcinoma. This can be an ancillary test for the origin of urothelial carcinoma specialy on cytology specimen. PS-25-063 PTEN loss in noninvasive low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma S. Arslankoz * , G. J. Netto, D. Ertoy Baydar * Yildirim Beyazit Hospital, Pathology, Ankara, Turkey Objective: We investigated the clinical and pathologic significance of PTEN loss in noninvasive low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma (NI-LGPUC). Method: Tissue-microarrays were constructed from biopsies of 82 patients with NI-LGPUC of bladder. A Total of 291 transurethral biopsies were included in the array comprising 82 initial and 209 follow-up biopsies. Every biopsy was represented with three cores, two from tumour and one from neighboring benign urothelium. Immunohistochemical staining was performed for PTEN. PTEN expression was scored semiquantitatively by generating an H-score (intensity x percentage of staining) (range between 0 and 300). Tumours with an H-score of 20 or below were accepted as loss of PTEN expression. Results: Mean patient follow-up was 64 months (14-285 months) . 10 out of 82 tumours (12.2 %) had grade and/or stage progression. We were able to evaluate PTEN expression of 75 cases. Among those, 5 cases (all males) displayed PTEN loss. Three patients with negative PTEN showed grade and/or stage progression in their follow-up. Fourth case developed PTEN loss in its recurrence where tumour transformed to invasive cancer. Objective: To describe a set of morphological and immunophenotypic features of PIN, located in close proximity to the glands of prostate cancer (PCa). Method: Material of 630 multifocal needle biopsies (including 62 repeat biopsies) and 218 radical prostatectomies was analyzed. Results: It was found that PIN located near the PCa glands had significantly increased frequency (p <0,05) of inverted or cribriform histologic variants when compared with the isolated PIN and characterized by the presence of intraluminal crystalloids, a higher frequency and level of AMACR expression (p <0,05) and do not differ from PCa based on this parameter (p > 0,05). ERG-positive nuclear staining of PIN cells occurs in 15 % of the 60 % ERG-positive PCa. To assess the predictive value of features that were significantly more often detected in PIN located in the vicinity of the PCa, 62 cases of repeat biopsies which were diagnosed previously with PIN were analyzed. PCa was detected in 30.6 % of patients in repeat biopsy group. 15 cases were referred to the group with high level of AMACR expression, 47-with the absence of AMACR expression. ERG expression was detected in only 2 patients of this group. Two-sided lesion, PIN multifocality and cribriform PIN occurred significantly more often in the first biopsy in patients who were subsequently diagnosed with cancer. In multivariate analysis, multifocal lesions, cribriform PIN, PIN with high expression of AMACR were independent predictors of PCa detection in consecutive biopsies. Conclusion: Morphological and immunophenotypical features of PIN associated with prostate cancer were determined, which may help in making a decision on whether to perform repeat biopsy or not. Immunohistochemical characteristics of prostate cancer in patients with age-related androgen deficiency and metabolic syndrome Y. Rogov Objective: To to determine the pattern of expression of androgen (AR) and estrogens (ERa and Erß) receptors, aromatase (Arom), growth factors (TGF-ß, EGFR and VEGF), proliferation (Ki-67, CyclinD1, TopoIIα) and apoptotic (Bax, Bcl-2) markers in prostate cancer (PCa) in patients with age-related androgen deficiency and metabolic syndrome. Method: Multifocal needle biopsies and radical prostatectomy specimens of patients with prostate cancer in the settings of age-related androgen deficiency and metabolic syndrome, and without aforementioned settings (16 and 30 patients, respectively), were analyzed. Results: It was found that in patients with age-related disorders of androgen status and metabolic syndrome, prostate cancer has a higher proliferative activity of tumour cells according to the expression of Ki-67, CyclinD1, TopoIIα, more frequent expression of EGFR, absence of VEGF expression, more infrequent decrease in Bax expression, more frequent decrease in AR expression, ERß, an increased frequency of ERa expression and Arom expression. It was found that the presence of inflammation in PCa patients with androgen deficiency and metabolic syndrome was accompanied by increased expression of TGF-ß, without changing the (p > 0,05) expression level of EGFR, VEGF and sex hormone receptors (AR, ERa and Erß). Conclusion: In prostate cancer of patients with age-related androgen deficiency and metabolic syndrome there were increased tumour cell proliferative activity, expression of epidermal growth factor receptor, estrogen receptor A and aromatase, decreased level of expression of androgen receptor, ß estrogen receptor, absence of vascular endothelial growth factor expression. Clinical significance of putative stemness marker Nanog in different histological subtypes of renal cell carcinoma. A study using tissue microarrays ( Chromophobe were selected. The association between expression of this marker and tumour characteristics was then analyzed. Results: The mean nuclear expression of Nanog is not significantly different in RCC subtypes (P = 0.07). A significant correlation was observed between H-Score of Nanog and RCC subtypes (P = 0.005). The highest mean H-Score of Nanog (96.8) was observed in ccRCC. The statistically significant association was not found between expression of Nanog and other patients, clinicopathologic features. Conclusion: These findings suggest that nuclear staining of Nanog cannot be considered as a valuable tool for the study of renal CSCs. Because of its expression in cytoplasm and nucleous in RCC subtypes, more data are needed to confirm the correlation of Nanog with the clinicopathological characteristics of RCC. Objective: About 95 % of testicular neoplasms are of germ cell origin. They develop as bilateral in 1-5 % of cases, mostly metachronously. Method: We report on three cases with bilateral testicular germ cell tumours treated by orchiectomy. Two of the patients underwent bilateral radical orchiectomy. One of them was diagnosed with seminoma in left testis and embryonal carcinoma in right testis, other one was diagnosed with bilateral seminoma. Bilateral partial orchiectomy was performed for the third patient and histopathologic evaluation revealed bilateral embryonal carcinomas. Also, intratubular germ cell neoplasia was detected surrounding testicle parenchyma in each patient. Results: The patient who underwent bilateral partial orchiectomy for bilateral embryonal carcinomas developed seminoma in right testis after one and half year after the operation. Conclusion: Bilateral radical orchiectomy is considered as standart treatment for bilateral germ cell tumours of the testicles. However long term effects are not yet known, testis-sparing surgery could be an alternative for the selected patients to improve quality of life and fertility. Here, we discuss the age distribution, interval and histological classification of these cases and reviewed previous reports of bilateral germ cell testicular tumours. Objective: We report a unique case of epidermoid cyst(EC) in one testicle and dermoid cyst(DC) in other side synchronously. A 24 year-old man, presented with left painless testicular mass. Laboratory investigations, including tumour markers were normal. Ultrasonography revealed a well-circumscribed, nonvascular mass in left testis and another cyst in right one. Patient underwent left radical orchiectomy, right partial orchiectomy and frozen storage of sperm. Grossly similar looking, one each cyst filled with keratin was seen on both testiscles. Histopathological evaluation of left testis revealed a cyst lined by keratinizing squamous epithelium and filled with keratin debris without dermal appendages or teratomatous elements. Right testis had a cyst lined by keratinizing squamous epithelium and sebaceous glands without noncutaneous teratomatous elements. On both testicles intratubular germ cell neoplasia (IGCNU) was not present. Diagnose was EC in left testis and DC in right one. Results: No testicular tumours developed during clinical follow-up. Conclusion: Testicular EC and DC are seen quite rare. They do not require any additional therapy after orchiectomy. Examining surrounding testis for teratomatous components and IGCNU is essential, because these would lead diagnosis to teratoma. This report could be a guide for diagnosis and management of young patients with bilateral benign testicular tumours. Objective: To review the diagnosis in urinary cytology of two rare and aggressive variants of urothelial carcinomas (UC) diagnosed by biopsy. Method: We looked for bladder "plasmacytoid urothelial carcinoma" (PUC) and "small cell neuroendocrine urothelial carcinoma" (SCNUC) since 1965 to 2015. Only cases with both cytology and biopsy studies and more than 50 % of the variant component were included. Results: We found 4 cases of PUC (2 were positive and 1 was now identidied as plasmacytoid). Eighteen SCNUC were divided into 3 groups: 1) pure neuroendocrine (9 cases); 2) mixed with urothelial carcinoma in situ (CIS) (6 cases) and 3) mixed with infiltrating UC (3 cases). The positive results in the three groups were 3, 5 and 1 respectively. In review 2, 5 and none were detected as having neuroendocrine morphology. Neuroendocrine differentiation was overlooked in 1 negative cytology (group 1) and 2 suspicious for malignancy (group 3). Conclusion: Specific characteristics distinguish these variants from conventional UC in urine cytology. PUC is a high grade carcinoma with peculiar round to oval nuclei with a particular smooth nuclear membrane and less irregular chromatin. SCNUC is similar to lung counterpart. The frequent inflammatory background hinders the diagnosis. They are more easily identified when mixed with CIS. Method: A 45-year-old male presented with a large pelvic lesion measuring 13 cm in maximum diameter. An exploratory laparotomy was performed. Results: Unexpectedly the pelvic lesion proved to be a uterus, dissection of which revealed a large tumour in the endometrial cavity measuring 7 cm in length. Morphological and immunohistochemical features of the tumour were consistent with clear cell adenocarcinoma, which infiltrated the uterine wall, the adjacent vas deferens and the seminal vesicle. An undescended testis focally infiltrated by the above tumour was also found. Conclusion: A variety of germ cell tumours of the testis have been reported in association with PMDS. As regards management of Mullerian remnants, most authors suggest leaving these structures in situ, because of the difficulty in dissection and the presumed absence of risk of malignancy. However, considering the current evidence of malignancies arising from Mullerian remnants, surgical removal or long-term follow-up is necessary. Objective: Association between DNA repair gene polymorphisms and several types of cancer was widely studied, but their role in development of clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC) has not been established. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the association of XRCC3Thr241Met, XPDLys751Gln XRCC1Arg194Trp, and XRCC1Arg399Gln gene polymorphism with the risk of CCRCC. Method: 73 patients with CCRCC and 100 healthy individuals without cancer were included in this study. XRCC3, XPD and XRCC1 genotypes were determined with polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Results: No association was found between variant genotypes of XRCC3Thr241Met, XRCC1Arg194Trp, and XRCC1Arg399Gln gene polymorphisms and risk of CCRCC in investigated cohorts. A significant difference between patients and controls was noticed for XPDLys751Gln variant genotype (OR = 2.92, 95%CI:1.47-5.79,p-0.001). For the comb i n e d g e n o t i p e s X R C C 3 T h r 2 4 1 M e t / X P D Ly s 7 5 1 G l n / XRCC1Arg194Trp/XXRC1Arg399 a significant difference between patients versus controls was observed for Thr/Thr+Lys/Gln+Arg/Arg+Arg/ Gln (OR = 2.56, 95%CI:1.36-5.62, p-0.002), and for Thr/Met+Lys/Gln+ Arg/Trp+Arg/Arg (OR = 3. Objective: We report the efficacy and diagnostic accuracy of a percutaneous biopsy for kidney masses. Method: Clinicopathological data for patients who underwent percutaneous biopsy for a renal mass have been retrieved from the hospital's database. Results: A total of 138 biopsies of renal masses was performed for the last 8 years in our institution. The biopsy was diagnostic in 107 cases (77.5 %) and non-diagnostic in 31 (22.5 %). Ten were for pediatric patients, 4 of which were diagnosed as a neuroblastic tumour. Sixty-five masses of RCC and 3 cases of urothelial carcinoma have been proven by biopsy. Biopsy proved the metastases of a germ cell tumour in 2, prostatic adenocarcinoma in 1, squamous cell carcinoma in 3, mucinous adenocarcinoma in 1, neuroendocrine carcinoma in 1, lung adenocarcinoma in 1 and serous adenocarcinoma in 1 patient. Two of 5 patients with a diagnosis of mesenchymal tumour was malignant on biopsy. Six patients had benign renal masses including oncocytoma, angiomyolipoma, ganglioneuroma. Six patients have been referred to oncology/hematology clinics with the diagnoses of lymphoma and plasmacytoma. Concordance rates between biopsy and final surgical pathology were > %95. Conclusion: Percutaneous biopsy is an effective method for providing correct diagnosis of a renal mass and guides treatment decision. Objective: EGISTs are very rare mesenchymal neoplasms, accounting for less than 5 % of soft tissue tumours. They occur outside the digestive tract and have similar histological and immunohistochemical characteristics with gastrointestinal stromal tumours. Method: We report the case of a 52 years old man presenting with gross hematuria. Results: Transabdominal ultrasonography revealed inside the urinary bladder, a pedunculated 5 cm mass, with 1 cm insertion base, which was removed by TUR-B. The tumour was composed of sheets of elongated and polygonal cells, with abundant acidophilic, vacuolar cytoplasm, atypical nuclei, and a mitotic count of 15/ 50 high power fields (HPFs). Tumour cells were positive for DOG 1 and CD34, and negative for CD117. Conclusion: There are less than 10 bladder EGISTs described to date, and there are insufficient data about their risk of progression. DOG 1 is the most sensitive marker for the diagnosis of EGISTs since they are frequently CD 117 negative. Objective: Stage pT1 urothelial carcinomas constitute a heterogeneous group with a different risk of progression. We have applied the recently developed molecular classification of high-grade urothelial carcinoma (two types: basal and luminal) to a group of pT1 urothelial carcinomas. Method: Immunohistochemistry was performed on sections from tissue arrays (85 samples from 45 different pT1 high grade urothelial carcinomas). A multimer-based method was applied in an automatic stainer (Ventana) using antibodies against CK5, CD44, CK20, p53 and ERBB2. Results: 29 (64,4 %) cases were categorized as luminal (CK 5-, CD44-, CK20+) and 3 (6.7 %) as basal (CK5+, CD44+, CK20-) subtypes. 13 cases (28.9 %) had overlapping results or no immunoexpression, and were not classifiable. P53 was positive in 18 (62,1 %) luminal and 1 of the 3 basal cases. ERBB2 was 3+ in 10 (34,5 %) luminal and 2 of the 3 basal cases. Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry aids to classify urothelial carcinomas as basal or luminal types although it is not conclusive in some cases. Most of the pT1 carcinomas are of luminal type, with a large proportion of p53+, and only one third ERBB2 3+. Larger studies are needed to elucidate a possible relevance of classification of pT1 carcinomas as basal type for treatment or follow up. Metachronus bilateral testicular germ cell tumoursreport of two Objective: Testicular cancer is the most common cancer of young men and its incidence continues to rise. The developement of bilateral testis cancer is exceedingly rare. Method: We report the case of two men. Results: One had stage 1 mixed embryonal carcinoma and teratoma at the age of 17 in 2000. He developed stage 2 contralateral seminoma testis 16 years later. Another patient had right orhidectomy in 2003 for stage 2 embryonal carcinoma, had adjuvant chemotherapy and developed stage 3 contralateral testicular tumour, 13 years later, wich was also seminoma. There is a small but definite risk for development of a second testicular malignancy and chemotherapy for the first testicular tumour does not eliminate the risk of developing a contralateral tumour. Objective: To evaluate whether ki-67 index has independent prognostic value for survival of patients with bladder papillary urothelial tumours. Method: Ki-67 was evaluated in 117 cases. Non-invasive (stage Ta, n = 61) tumours were: papilloma (n = 2), papillary urothelial neoplasia of low malignant potential (PUNLMP; n = 5), low grade (LG; n = 44) and high grade (HG; n = 10) papillary urothelial carcinoma. Invasive (stage T1, n = 56) tumours were: LG (n = 6) and HG (n = 50) carcinoma. Statistical analysis included Fisher and x2 tests, univariate and multivariate survival analyses were performed according to the Kaplan-Meier method with log rank test and Cox's proportional hazard method. Results: The Ki-67 index increases with the grade; the difference is significant between the LGTa and HGTa (p <10-6). The proliferation index is also correlated with the tumour stage (p < 10-5). In univariate analysis, the Ki-67 is not correlated with recurrence or disease-free survival (DFS) (p = 0.752). However it is a predictor of progression (p < 10-4) and is correlated with progression-free survival (PFS) (p < 0.0001). In multivariate analysis, the Ki −67 emerges as factor independent of tumour progression. The Ki-67 appears as a predictive marker of tumour progression bladder urothelial cellcarcinoma in multivariate analysis. Objective: Pre-operative serum PSA, Gleason pathological grade, positive surgical margins and capsular incision are significant in predicting clinical and biochemical recurrence of the disease treated with prostatectomy. The modified Gleason classification uses prognostic groups that better reflect the true biological nature of disease. Method: 121 patients with acinar type prostate adenocarcinoma were selected following radical prostatectomy with acompaning clinical and histopathological data. Patient groups were divided according to the stage and the positive surgical margins and Ki67 index of proliferation. The outcome was based on the data of biochemical recurrence. We compared the prognostic impact of old and new Gleason classification using standard statistical methods. Results: By analyzing both Gleason systems (an average score and prognostic groups) comparing groups with a positive and negative margin, a significantly larger Gleason score was found in group with a positive margin (p = 0.003). The significant correlation of biochemical recurrence with new Gleason prognostic groups was also found (p = 0,048) but not in patients with tumours with positive margins after prostatectomy. Ki67 proliferation index significantly correlated with prognostic Gleason group system, also in tumours with positive margins (p = 0,0012 and p = 0,0028; respectively). Objective: HLA-G expression has been associated with an increased tumourigenicity in some solid tumours and has been detected in variable percentages in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and rarely in nonneoplastic kidney. The aim of the study is to determine HLA-G expression percentage in RCC as well as its prognostic value. Method: HLA-G expression was prospectively analysed by immunochemistry in neoplastic and nonneoplastic tissue of 85 nephrectomies of patients operated in our hospital between 2003 and 2011. HLA-G quantification was divided into four groups according to the expression. Likewise, a systematic collection of clinical data was performed to evaluate the role of HLA-G expression in the prognosis of RCC. Results: There is a positive correlation in HLA-G expression between neoplastic and nonneoplastic tissue (p < 0,001). There are no significant differences in HLA-G expression according to histologic type (p = 0,407) or to the stage at diagnosis (p = 0,509). It does not exit significant correlation between HLA-G expression and time to progression. Conclusion: HLA-G expression is present in RCC regardless histologic type and tumour stage. There is a positive correlation between HLA-G expression in neoplastic and nonneoplastic tissue, so this can not be used as a diagnostic marker. Additionally it is not useful as an independent prognostic marker of RCC. Objective: Protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) methylate a variety of histones, RNA-binding proteins, enzymes, small molecules, and has been linked to several malignancies. Method: Real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis of PRMT1 mRNA level was analyzed in 15 clear cell, 6 papillary and 3 chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (RCC), and compared to its expression in normal kidney tissue adjacent to the tumour. Furthermore, PRMT1 mRNA level was correlated to tumour stage, nuclear grade and tumour dimension. Survival analysis was also performed to define predictors of cancer-related death. Results: PRMT1 mRNA level was almost three times lower in all tumours compared to its expression in non-tumour kidney tissues (p < 0.001). There was tendency of decline in PRMT1 mRNA level by each increase in tumour stage (T1:0.45; T2:0.36; T3:0.34). Moreover, tumours with higher nuclear grades (III-IV) had highly down-regulated PRMT1 mRNA level (0.29) that was lower than those observed in nuclear grade I-II (0.42). Correlation of PRMT1 mRNA levels and tumour dimensions was not statistically confirmed, despite detection of clear negative trend. Nuclear stage, tumour grade and renal vein invasion were predictors of cancer-related death, while mRNA PRMT1 level did not influence patients' survival. Conclusion: PRMT1 became down-regulated during RCCs pathogenesis and significantly decreased in more advanced carcinomas. PS-25-085 GLO1 protein expression is strongly linked to adverse tumour phenotype and early PSA recurrence in prostate cancer C. Burdelski * , A. Heumann, C. Hube-Magg, M. Kluth, M. C. Tsourlakis, C. Koop, S. Minner, T. Schlomm, G. Sauter * University Medical Center Hamburg, General and Visceral Surgery, Hamburg, Germany Objective: Glyoxalase 1 (GLO1) is an enzyme involved in glycolysis and removal of toxic metabolites from the cell. In functional analysis using cancer cell line models GLO1 has been shown to be involved in apoptosis inhibition by modification of NFkB signaling. In line with a antiapopototic function GLO1 has been found to be up regulated in a large variety of cancer types. But little is known about the role of GLO1 in prostate cancer. Method: To analyze the relevance of GLO1 expression in prostate cancer, we utilized our pre-existing tissue microarray containing >11,000 prostate cancer specimens with clinical follow up and attached molecular database. Results: GLO1 staining was predominantly stained in the cytoplasm of invasive prostate cancers, no GLO1 staining was detectable in normal prostate epithelium. Increased GLO1 staining was associated with adverse tumour phenotype and PSA-recurrence (p < 0.0001,each). Furthermore PTEN (10q23) and FOXP1 (3p13) deletions were significantly linked to at least weak GLO1 expression (p < 0.0001). Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that high levels of GLO1 protein expression are strongly linked to adverse phenotype and early PSA recurrence in prostate cancer. They also suggest that these associations might be driven by a strong link of high GLO1 protein expression with molecular features of chromosomal instability. Objective: Kallikrein-related peptidase 2 (KLK2) is one family member of serine proteases (KLK1-15) with a wide spectrum of functions. In general KLKs function relies on the control of steroid hormones through trypsin-like activities. KLK2 has a sequence homology of 78 % with PSA (KLK3) and seems to activate it. In prostate cancer cell culture experiments evidence was given that KLK2 enhances cell proliferation. Only few KLK2 expression pattern analyses in prostate cancer have been performed. To prove the clinical relevance of KLK2 expression in prostate cancer, we took advantage of our pre-existing tissue microarray (TMA) containing >11,000 prostate cancer specimens connected with extensive follow up and molecular data. Method: For immunohistochemistry, freshly cut TMA sections were immunostained in one day and one experiment. Results: In statistical analysis we found high-level immunostaining of KLK2 linked to ERG negativity in prostate cancers. Low KLK2 immunostaining was significantly linked to adverse pathological findings. Analyzing associations to PSA recurrence, we found significant association between low KLK2 immunostaining and early PSA recurrence (p < 0.0001, each). Conclusion: High-level immunostaining of KLK2 is linked to ERG negativity in prostate cancer. Deficiency of KLK2 expression in prostate cancer specimens is significantly linked to advanced clinical tumour stage and early PSA recurrence. Nephrogenic adenoma of the urinary tract: A 6-year single center experience D. Turcan * , M. Acikalin, E. Yilmaz, F. Canaz, D. Arik * Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Pathology, Turkey Objective: Nephrogenic adenoma is an uncommon benign lesion of the urinary tract. The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinicopathological features of this lesion and review the literature. Method: A retrospective series of 17 cases of nephrogenic adenoma diagnosed in our department between 2010 and 2016 was analyzed. The clinical parameters were obtained from the clinical records. All histological slides were reviewed and the diagnoses were confirmed. Results: Study population consisted of 14 men and 3 women, aged 3-80 years (mean 58.5). The most common location of the lesion was the urinary bladder (13 cases) followed by the renal pelvis (2 cases), ureter (1 case) and urethra (1 case). A history of urothelial carcinoma and repeated TUR procedures were observed in 11 cases. There was 2 pediatric patients aged 3 years. Both of them had undergone previous urosurgery because of megaureter in one and bladder exstrophy in the other. Recurrence of lesion was observed in two patients. Histologically, the lesions exhibited, singly or in combination, tubular, cystic, papillary, polypoid and flat growth patterns. Conclusion: Nephrogenic adenoma displays a broad spectrum of architectural and cytological features. Recognition of its characteristic histopathological features is needed in distinguishing this lesion from its mimickers. Spermatocytic seminoma: Report of three cases A. Chikha * , N. Ibisevic, F. Skenderi, S. Vranic, N. Bilalovic, M. Selimovic * Objective: Spermatocytic seminoma is a rare tumour of testis composed of germ cells, not associated with intratubular germ cell neoplasia. Spermatocytic seminoma affects more frequently males with descended testis. Method: We retrospectively explored our archival material searching for the diagnosis of seminoma and/or spermatocytic seminoma during the 10-years period (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) . Results: We found three cases of spermatocytic seminoma during the 10years period (rate~0.04 %). One tumour was diagnosed in older male (60 years old) while the other two spermatocytic seminoma cases were diagnosed in young males (29 and 33 years old, respectively). None of the patients had previous history of cryptorchidism. Two patients were clinically suspicious of testicular cancer while the third one (29yo) had clinical diagnosis of purulent orchitis and semitorsion. Histopathologic examination revealed morphologic features of spermatocytic seminoma confirmed by immunohistochemistry. All three patients received no adjuvant treatment and did well at last check-up. Conclusion: Spermatocytic seminoma is a rare variant of testicular seminoma that also may be seen in young adults. Surgical treatment appears to be optimal with an excellent clinical outcome. Objective: There is controversy surrounding the optimal management of the testicular remnant associated with the testicular regression syndrome (TRS). Some authors advocate the need for surgical exploration, whereas others believe this unnecessary. These differing opinions are based on the variable reports of viable germ cell elements found within the testicular remnants. This study aimed to quantify the cardinal features of the disease and to determine the incidence of viable germ cells. Method: This study is a retrospective review of all excised testicular remnants in patients with impalpable testis over a 10-year-period. Results: A total of 60 cases of TRS were submitted for histopathological examination. Patient age ranged from 1 to 62 years (median: 6 years). Microscopic evaluation showed haemosiderin-laden macrophages in 5 cases (8.5 %), dystrophic calcification in 7 cases (11.7 %), vas deferens in 50 cases (83.3 %), epididymal tissue in 34 cases (56.7 %) and Leydig cells in 16 cases (26.7 %). Seminiferous tubules were noted in 21 cases (35 %) and germ cells were only identified in 2 cases (3.3 %). No atypical germ cells were seen. Conclusion: Viable germ cells were only found in 3.3 % of examined remnants implying a negligible risk of future germ-cell cancerisation and minimizing the need for their systematic removal. Objective: While the currently used clinical and pathological variables provide prognostic information on Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (UCB); they still have a limited ability to predict tumour progression. Cancer cells exhibit a wide range of mitochondrial dysfunctions that could provide a possibility to preferentially target cancer cell mitochondria and improve therapeutic selectivity. TOMM34 is one of the translocases of the outer membrane of mitochondria (Tom) components that was identified a crucial factor for the protein import. The aim is to investigate the expression pattern of TOMM34 in bladder cancer and its correlation with the clinico-pathological parameters of those cases. Method: Sixty patients with non-invasive (high grade and low grade) and invasive urothelial carcinoma (high grade and low grade) were included in the study in. The immunohistochemical expression was performed using the TOMM34 antibody (Novus Biologicals, USA). Results: TOMM34 immunohistochemical expression was significantly higher in muscle invasive tumours (p < 0.01) and in WHO-ISUP high grade tumours (p < 0.01). Higher TOMM34 protein levels were associated with decreased overall survival of patients with UCB (Chi-square 27.9 and p < 0.01). Conclusion: TOMM34 is a potential poor prognostic factor in UCB, and further functional studies could unravel its possible role as a therapeutic target in UCB. Objective: Nuclear grading (NG) is not routinely applied to prostatic carcinoma (PCa). This study evaluated NG as a predictor of PCa outcomes in a cohort of radical prostatectomy (RP) patients. Method: 1579 patients with PCa treated by RP were enrolled in a multicenter national database. Whole-mount specimens were graded by the 2014 modification of ISUP/Gleason and nuclear grade as defined by Mostofi. Outcomes data were obtained as part of ongoing data collection. Unadjusted Kaplan Meier (KM) estimation curves and multivariable Cox Proportional Hazards analyses were used to evaluate two time-to-event endpoints: biochemical recurrence (BCR) and distant metastasis (MET). Results: Higher NG was significantly associated with higher D'Amico risk stratum (p < 0.0001), worse biopsy Gleason sum (GS) (p < 0.0001), worse prostatectomy ISUP/Gleason score (p < 0.0001), higher cT-Stage (p = 0.0356), higher pT stage (p < 0.0001), positive margin status (p = 0.0002), presence of extra-capsular extension (p < 0.0001), and seminal vesicle involvement (p < 0.0001). KM curves showed a significant difference in odds of BCR (p < 0.0001) and MET (p < 0.0001) with poorer outcomes for highest versus lowest NG. Multivariable analysis showed higher risk of MET for highest versus lowest NG category: (HR 3 vs. 1 = 21.39, p = 0.0049). In Gleason grade 7 tumours, NG3 had a significant association with BCR (p < .0001) and metastasis-free survival (p = .01), compared to NG1-2 tumours. Conclusion: NG is useful in predicting worse PCa outcomes, especially in Gleason grade 7 tumours. Results: 245 consecutive patients with invasive BC were identified: 84 (33.07 %) OW, 72 (29.38 %) OB and 91 (37.14) NW. Most of the OW and OB women were aged >40 (0.0092). Also, OW patients had higher rates of grade 1 tumour (0.0138). NW patients had significantly less lymph nodes metastases (p = 0.0165) comparing to OW/OB group. There were no statistically significant differences between these three groups and tumour size, histological type, inflammatory cell infiltration and the presence of emboli. Conclusion: In our series, BC patients had a high prevalence of OB/OW, mostly over the age of 40. OB group is associated with poor prognostic factors (lymph node metastasis). However, most of the tumours in the OW group were of grade 1 histologically. Objective: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women. Livin, the most recently identified IAP, is one the most tumour-specific genes in the human genome. Its role in breast cancer progression remains unknown, the expression pattern of livin gene in human breast cancer tissues and its correlation with the prognostic factors including patient outcome was evaluated. Method: The surgically resected 34 breast cancer tissue specimens were analyzed and examined by immunostaining to evaluate the expression pattern of livin protein. All patients were followed up for disease-free and overall survival. Results: Livin protein was expressed predominantly in the cytoplasm of tumour cells. The positive expression was observed in 88.2 % (30 out of -Thursday, 29 September 2016 .3 E-PS-01 Breast Pathology 34) cases of breast carcinoma specimens analyzed. Livin gene expression was significantly correlated with tumour size. (P ≤ 0.05) No statistical significant correlation was detected between livin gene expression and patient's age, menstrual status, tumour grade, axillary lymph node metastasis, ER, PR hormonal status and HER-2 receptor status. (P 0.05) There was a statistical significant correlation between livin gene expression and TNM tumour stage. (P ≤ 0.05) Patients with livin positive breast cancer tumours had a poor disease-free survival and a shorter overall survival in comparison with livin negative tumours, although the difference was not statistically significant. (P 0.05) Conclusion: We conclude that, the high expression pattern of livin gene in breast carcinoma may play a prominent role for disease progression. Livin expression may help predict the poor clinical outcome and could be useful as a molecular biomarker and therapeutic target for effective breast cancer therapy. Objective: Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is second most common breast carcinoma. ILC is also famous for distinctive metastatic sites which are different from those of the other carcinomas of the breast. We report a case of ILC in a 57-year-old woman who visited the hospital with increased postmenopausal vaginal bleeding for 1 month. Method: Total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The uterus and both adnexa were grossly normal except an increased myometrial thickness and hemorrhagic foci within myometrium which are the most common features of adenomyosis. Results: Microscopically, dyscohesive cells with mild nuclear pleomorphism infiltrated uterine cervix, endometrial stroma, myometrium, and both adnexa. Adenomyosis was found in the myometrium and was also infiltrated by the tumour cells. Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells were positive for estrogen receptor and cytokeratin 7, and negative for CD10, vimentin, and E-cadherin. Ki-67 index was approximately 10 %. Examination of her breasts was done after the tumour was diagnosed as metastatic ILC. Needle biopsies of the breasts revealed ILC in both breasts. Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry for cytokeratins, E-cadherin, and CD10 should be concerned when atypical dyscohesive cells are found in the endometrial specimen to rule out ILC. A study of claudins 1, 3 and 4 in pre-cancerous lesions and noninvasive cancers of the breast O. Anscombe * , S. Shousha * Charing Cross Hospital, Histopathology, London, United Kingdom Objective: The claudins are a family of small transmembrane proteins that elicit homo and heterophilic interactions in order to mediate tight junction formation between epithelial cells; maintaining cellular polarity, and mediating permeability. Studies have identified the differential expression patterns of claudins in normal breast tissue and in invasive breast carcinoma. This study was aimed at elucidating the point at which claudin expression began to change during tumourigenesis. Method: We utilised immunohistochemistry to study claudin 1, 3 and 4 in 80 tissue samples including examples of normal, hyperplastic, atypical and malignant in situ lesions. Six cases of invasive apocrine carcinomas were also studied. Results: Apocrine breast lesions maintained their expression pattern from benign through to DCIS and invasive carcinoma. In non-apocrine lesions, weak positive expression of claudins 3 and 4 seemed to be acquired once the lesion has progressed to ductal carcinoma in situ. Toker cells of the nipple had a claudin expression vastly different from that of Paget's disease. Conclusion: Claudin expression in breast lesions is determinant on the expression of cells from which they are derived. Apocrine lesions have a consistent expression pattern from benign to invasive carcinoma. Toker cells may not be the cells of origin for Paget's disease. E-PS-01-006 High CD105 protein expression is related to phyllodes tumours malignancy: Report of a borderline phyllodes tumour with rapid lung metastases and study of 54 breast phyllodes tumours K. Method: To better understand their clinical behavior, we retro-studied a case of borderline phyllodes tumour which caused rapid lung metastases with focus on the morphological transition between the primary tumour and the metastatic lung lesions. CD105 expressions were detected by immunohistochemistry in 54 breast PTs including 33 begin, 11 borderline and 10 malignant tumours. Results: For the case study, in the primary breast tumour we found only a small tumour area showed increased stromal cellularity and atypia with borderline PT features, while the lung metastatic lesions transformed into highly malignant PT with undifferentiated sarcomatous appearances. We frequently observed tumour heterogeneity in the borderline and malignant PTs which were more likely to have larger tumour size comparing to benign PTs. Moreover, borderline and malignant PTs exhibited higher expression of CD105, suggesting its role in driving PTs development. Conclusion: This study emphasized on tumour heterogeneity and CD105 expression relating to tumour malignancy and metastases especially for borderline PTs with giant tumour size. Intra-tumour genetic heterogeneity in breast cancer: A case report A. Matsionis * , I. Pavlenko, A. Petrov * Rostov Regional Bureau of Pathology, Dept. of Experimental Pathology, Russia Objective: Although the majority of Her2-positive breast cancers show homogeneous distribution of Her2 protein expression, intra-tumour heterogeneity sometimes can be observed. In our experience this is a rare phenomenon in breast cancer (approx. 1 per 1000 cases). A case of clearcut intra-tumour Her2 heterogeneity is presented. Method: We determined Her2 immunohistochemical (IHC) expression in a breast cancer specimen of 63-year-old woman. In order to distinguish true heterogeneity from staining artifact FISH analysis was performed. In addition, ER, PR and Ki67 were also assessed. The results clearly showed coexistence of two clones with different Her2 status in one tumour. Her2-amplified and non-amplified regions were closely adjacent to each other and matched corresponded IHC-positive (IHC3+) and negative areas. However, uniform expression of ER and PR was observed. Ki67 rate was high (35 %). So in this case the tumour cells harbored luminal B phenotype with two different Her2 patterns. We report a case of luminal B breast carcinoma with intratumour Her2 heterogeneity. Clinical follow-up for this patient was limited. However, it emphasizes the possibility of individual tumour variation at a molecular level. Heterogeneous tumours potentially present a challenge for clinicians, as may have impact on treatment response, prognosis and disease outcome. Conclusion: We discovered the connection between the morphological intratumoural heterogeneity and molecular subtypes. It turned out that triple-negative tumours are more frequently characterized by the presence of one type of morphological structure, while in the luminal BC there are tumours with five different types of structures. However, not in all patients basal-like breast tumours show significant intratumoural heterogeneity and triple-negative BC is not always a clonally homogeneous tumour. Thus, the analysis of morphological and molecular heterogeneity of BC is the basis for a better understanding of carcinogenesis and tumour progression mechanisms. Tumours with anaplastic component have not only a difference in the histological structure, but also in their malignant potential, as well as in the expression of epithelial, mesenchymal and immunohistochemical myoepithelial markers. Histologically,desmoplasia of the stroma, which is typical of DBC, is completely absent in anaplastic areas. Tumour cells create a semblance of stromal framework from themselves. Revealed cases of diffuse expression of vimentin, SMA and p63 in anaplastic cells confirm that in the process of differentiation loss, tumour cells acquire myoepithelial and/or mesenchymal phenotype. This fact is associated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition in tumours. This results in the destruction of dense adhesion contacts (reduction and change in polarity of expression of E-cadherin) and the restructure of complexes, which provide the attachment of cells to the substrate. Conclusion: Heterogeneity of ductal carcinoma is manifested by the anaplastic (sarcomatoid) component, where we can trace the ability of epithelial tumour cells to acquire a properties of mesenchymal cells, which do not require the stroma and have an aggressive malignant potential, affecting the survival of patients. E-PS-01-011 Homogenous solid lesion, right upper outer quadrant: A histological red herring C. Roberts * , N. Shah * Waterford Regional Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Ireland Objective: In this case report we describe what we believe to be the first reported case of primary mediastinal choriocarcinoma presenting with a breast lump. Method: Our patient is an 18 year old female who presented to hospital with chest pain. On examination, a palpable breast lump was noted. This was biopsied and initially found to be oestrogen receptor negative, progesterone receptor negative and Her-2 negative with a proliferation index of 80-90 %. Further immunohistochemical testing showed the tumour cells to be positive for β-hCG, PLAP and AE1/AE3 and negative for CD30 and AFP. Imaging showed bilateral hilar masses, multiple lung nodules and a lesion in the right breast. There was no history of pregnancy and the uterus appeared normal on ultrasound scan. The patient was treated with four cycles of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin (BEP) and follow up scans have shown a partial response to therapy. Results: Fifty-seven cases with MIC were distinguished from pure DCIS. The small angulated epithelial clusters were displayed distinctly in the stroma adjacent ducts by CKpan expression, with p63, SMMHC and Calponin negative. These clearly separated microscopic foci were one or more, with the maximum diameter 0.1~1.0 mm. Most of MIC was histological grade-II. The DCIS component ranged from 4 ducts to extensive distribution, 27 cases were high nuclear grade and 30 cases were moderate. The morphological subtypes of DCIS were mainly comedo and solid, others were cribriform and papillary. C-erbB-2 in 31 cases with MIC expressed 3+ or 2+, however, the intensity of 33 cases were lower than or equal to DCIS. Conclusion: Immunohistochemistry of CKpan, myoepithelial markers and c-erbB-2 could improve the detection rate of MIC, which highlighted more objectively the MIC ranges and benefited to precise individual therapy. Conclusion: The prognostic value of BC immunophenotypes persists when adjusting the age, the tumour diameter and the stage of the disease and this "morphologic-molecular" model was robust in relapse prediction and recurrence risk stratified by traditional prognostic parameters. Objective: Spindle cell lesions of the breast constitute a heterogenous group ranging from reactive to neoplastic, highly malignant disorders and their accurate diagnosis can be quite challenging. We report 3 cases of spindle cell lesions of the breast with emphasis on differential diagnosis. Method: All three patients were females, aged 24, 60 and 70 years, and presented with palpable masses in the left breast measuring 2, 5.3 and 3 cm in maximum diameter respectively. Results: The first lesion was a desmoid-type fibromatosis composed of intersecting fascicles of bland spindle cells, positive for SMA and β-catenin and negative for keratins. Histological diagnosis of the second lesion was nodular fasciitis. It was composed of short fascicles of plump fibroblastic/myofibroblastic cells (SMA+, Desmin-, β-catenin-, keratin-), with frequent mitoses, set in a loose, myxoid stroma containing lymphocytes, erythrocytes and thin-walled vessels. The third lesion was a metaplastic myoepithelial carcinoma composed mainly of atypical spindle cells, positive for keratins 5/6, p63 and CD10, with focal squamous and mesenchymal differentiation. Conclusion: Spindle cell lesions of the breast represent a diverse group of diseases with overlapping histological features. Careful histologic examination in conjunction with immunohistochemistry and clinical history will lead to the correct diagnosis in morphologically challenging cases. Objective: Mucocele like tumours (MLT) of the breast are quite rare neoplasms displaying an broad spectrum. These lesions were considered benign initially. But now, they are believed to be related to atypical ductal hyperplasia, ductal carcinoma, or mucinous carcinoma. Preoperative diagnosis in fine needle aspiration and core biopsy is difficult. Method: We are reporting a case of mucocele like tumour with ductal carcinoma in situ and ductal carcinoma in a 71-year old Turkish woman. The patient had a palpable mass in her left breast. Mammograpy showed ill defined and lobulated mass with widespread tiny microcalcifications. Histopathologic findings were consistent with MLT and microscopic focus of ductal carcinoma was also noted in mastectomy specimen. And she is currently disease-free in the 116th month. Results: We believe that our case will the first patient from Turkey and will be added to the database as one of the longest term follow-up MLT cases reported in pubmed. Conclusion: If a mucocele-like tumour is suspected in fine needle biopsy, surgical excision should be recommended and the specimen should be carefully evaluated to exclude the presence of ductal carcinoma in situ or carcinoma. Objective: Desmoid tumours of the breast are rare. Although benign, they can clinically mimic breast cancer. Their treatment is challenging. We describe a case of a desmoid tumour of the breast and discuss briefly its pathological diagnosis and treatment modalities. Method: An 18-year-old healthy female presented with a left breast lump that appeared in the prebubertal period and has been progressively growing. Physical examination showed a 6 cm hard mass on the left breast. MRI confirmed the presence of an ill defined of 64 × 60 mm, invading the pectoral muscle. Needle core biopsy was performed; pathological examination was in favor of a desmoid tumour. The patient underwent a wide local excision of the external portion of her left breast. Results: Gross pathologic evaluation of the specimen received in our laboratory revealed a gray-white firm mass. Microscopic examination showed a proliferation of bland spindle cells arranged in fascicles with variable amounts of intervening collagen. Deep surgical margins were positive. Tumour cells were positive with βcatenin. A diagnosis of desmoids tumour of the breast was made. Conclusion: Fibromatosis is a rare, locally aggressive breast tumour. Complete surgical excision is the proven method of treatment; frozen section pathology could be used to check surgical margins. Objective: Metaplastic breast cancer (MBC) is a rare subtype of breast carcinoma. Method: We report a case of a 42 year-old female who presented with a lump in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast since 6 months. Physical examination revealed a palpable mass that was painless, firm and mobile. Lumpectomy was performed. Gross examination of specimen revealed a firm 2.2 cm greyish-white mass, of firm consistency. Results: Microscopic examination revealed that the tumour was biphasic and contained both epithelial and mesenchymal component. Epithelial component was made of cells arranged in glands,clusters and nests. Tumoural cells were round to oval with a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. Nuclei were enlarged with occasional prominent nucleoli. The cells were surrounded by interlacing bundles of pleomorphic, spindle shaped cells, with large hyperchromatic nuclei. Sheets of cartilaginous matrix and chondroid metaplasia were seen. Many mitotic figures were present. Based on these histological features, diagnosis of metaplastic carcinoma was made. Immunophenotype of tumour was estrogen negative, progesterone positive, Her-2/neu positive. Proliferation index Ki-67 was high (90 %). Conclusion: When pathologist encounters a malignant breast tumour with chondroid elements, metaplastic carcinoma with chondroid differentiation should be considered, due to its rarity and different prognosis. Pathological response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in young breast cancer: Correlation between age and treatment response N. N. Benchiha * , L. Houti * Djillali Liabes University, Pharmacy, Sidi Bel Abbès, Algeria Objective: The aim of this study is to identify the potential of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NCT) on stratified patient's age groups, allowing a better understanding about how each subgroup responds distinctly to NCT. Method: From January 2008 to June 2014, a retrospective analysis was made on response data of 84 women with operable breast cancer treated by NCT in the oncology department of Sidi Bel Abbes (Algeria). Patients were stratified into two age groups (group1, ≤39 years; group2, >39 years). Pathological node involvement, Tumour grade, conservative treatment, 5year recurrence and death were analysed according to age at diagnosis. The significance of associations was tested by the chi-squared test. Results: The death and the recurrence in those < =39 years of age being significantly greater than that in the other age group (50 and 57 % versus 23 and 27 %, P < 0.03). There was a trend for patients' group1 to have positive node involvement and tumour grade G > 2 (71 %, 50 %) compared with those of group2 (57 %, 41 %), but without statistical significance. Conclusion: During the study period, in the youngest subgroup age, the 5-year recurrence and death rates were higher than in older premenopausal patients. The relationship between age and treatment response was not directly correlated. Objective: This study aimed to analysis the relative risk (RR) of breast cancer-related recurrence on disease-free survival (DFS) in patients of less than 39 years of age. Method: Between January 2008 and June 2014, 84 women with operable breast cancer were admitted to the oncology department, for cures of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, followed by surgery and adjuvant treatments. Patients were stratified into two age groups (group 1, ≤39 years; group 2, >39 years). In a forward stepwise procedure, the following four selected parameters were entered in a Cox regression model: age (≤39 years), tumour grade (G > 2), clinical stage and progesterone receptor (PR) status. Objective: Metastatic tumours involving the myocardium and endocardium are uncommonly encountered. It was our aim to evaluate the prevalence of these rare tumours and study their presentation in order to increase awareness to their existence. Method: Pathological reports from Sheba Medical Center (Israel) and medical records from Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases (Serbia) were screened for cases of metastatic cardiac tumours. Medical, radiological and pathological data of the identified cases was retrieved and reviewed. Results: We found less than a dozen cases of metastatic cardiac tumours out of thousands of registered cardiac surgeries. The metastatic tumours identified were melanoma, carcinomas of lung, colon and kidney and sarcomas of uterine origin. We found that metastatic cardiac tumours comprised 15.8 % of all the cardiac tumours. Imaging studies played a central role in the identification of cardiac masses. However, as differential diagnosis exists, primarily with thrombi, histopathological evaluation was required for definite diagnosis of metastatic cardiac disease. Conclusion: Metastatic cardiac tumours are extremely rare. As new diagnostic technologies and improved survival of oncological patients may increase the incidence of cardiac metastatic tumours in the future, awareness to their existence and knowledge of their presentation are key factors in their timely recognition. Objective: Primary cardiac angiosarcoma is an extremely rare entity with a dismal prognosis. Like other primary cardiac malignancies these tumours present with unspecific symptoms that may mimic other, more common cardiac conditions, thus making the diagnosis extremely challenging. Method: 46-year-old man, initial presentation with symptoms of a non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction. A week before his death the patient was referred to our institution with decreasing respiratory function. CT scans showed multiple disseminated cerebral and pulmonal foci, in the transesophageal echocardiography a mass was observed. Miliary tuberculosis, endocarditis with septic emboli, possible metastatic tumour of unknown primary as well as an acute exacerbation of the patient's coexisting sarcoidosis were considered in the differential diagnosis. The patient's condition deteriorated rapidly and he died within days. Results: Clinical autopsy revealed numerous tumourous foci in nearly every organ and a tumour arising from the right atrium of the heart. Histomorphology and immunohistochemical profile were consistent with angiosarcoma. A previously not described KRAS mutation was detected in the molecularpathological analysis. Conclusion: Although the prognosis is devastating and ultimately fatal, early diagnosis followed by multimodal therapy improves the survival of primary cardiac angiosarcomas. Targeting exome sequences in congenital heart diseases: Are we there yet? A. Capuani * * Objective: A model to investigate the protein coding variants during early embryogenesis of the most severe forms of congenital heart defects. Method: We reviewed the anatomy of ventriculoarterial cardiac anomalies looking for a common denominator on the theoretical concept of teratological continuum in malformations (Schwalbe 1906). Results: We found evidence of sequential malrotation on the ventricular base-apex axis of the Trabecula Septomarginalis (TSM) in specimens from Objective: Primary leiomyosarcoma (LMS) of the inferior vena cava (IVC) is a rare tumour characterized by clinical latency and a nonspecific presentation which result in diagnostic delay, high stage at presentation and poor outcome. Method: We present the case of a 38 year old woman with a 3-week history of abdominal pain and low-grade fever. An initial diagnosis of abdominal tuberculosis was made and anti-tuberculous therapy (ATT) was started in a private hospital. A week later, the patient developed breathlessness, abdominal distention and jaundice. ATT-induced hepatitis was considered and the patient was referred to our hospital. A Color Doppler and Computed Tomography revealed dilatation and occlusion of the IVC by possibly a thrombus, extending from proximal common iliac vein up to right atrium along with extension into right renal vein and right hepatic vein. A diagnosis of Budd-Chiari syndrome was entertained and the patient underwent thrombolytic therapy. However, her dyspnea continued to progress and she died after 12 days of admission. Results: A complete autopsy showed marked dilation and luminal occlusion of the IVC due to the presence of a firm, greyish brown tumour with para-caval, right renal and hepatic venous and right atrial extensions. Microscopy revealed a pleomorphic tumour arising from the venous wall, composed of irregular fascicles of plump spindle cells, and multinucleate bizarre cells in a loose fibromyxoid background. Large areas of hemorrhage and necrosis and brisk mitoses were seen. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma. Conclusion: Awareness and strong clinical suspicion are important for the diagnosis of this rare tumour. Objective: Fabry disease (FD) is a rare disorder by mutation in gene encoding α-galactosidase enzyme wich metabolizes ceramidetrijexoside (Gb3); its alteration produces accumulation of Gb3 in lysosomes kidney, endothelial, myocardial, neurons and smooth muscle cells. We present a patient with severe heart failure wich the early diagnosis through a myocardial biopsy (MB) could improve his evolution. Method: 54 year old male with myopericarditis 4 years ago, chronic renal failure and hypertrophic non-obstructive cardiomyopathy (HNC), without skin or corneal lesions. The diagnostic study included MB after 1 year. Results: The optical microscopy presented cells with abundant vacuoles, PAS negative and something positive with oil-red. In ultrastructural study (US) lipid inclusions, frequent electron-laminated or solid myocyte predominant type level, more isolated in endothelial cells were observed. The diagnosis was suggestive of FD. Conclusion: FD is inhered disorder with irreversible tissular accumulation of Gb3, despite replacement therapy, so the diagnosis through MB should be early. Gb3 deposits found in this biopsy were diffuse, altering all cell structures. In this sense, our patient, 5 years ago, presented myopericarditis with incipient ventricular hypertrophy, probably, as the beginning of FD. In conclusion, we emphasize the value of MB with US in MNC and to consider starting early enzyme replacement therapy. Objective: Primary cardiac neoplasms are rare. Metastases to the heart are more frequent than primary lesions. We described here the case of the primary cardiac angiosarcoma of the young man firstly presented as metastatic brain tumour. Method: Light microscopic and immunohistochemical study. Results: A 19-year-old previously healthy man with rapidly progressing severe headache, nausea and vomiting and multiple painful spots in the spine and extremities was admitted to the neurosurgery department. Left temporal brain metastatic tumour and multiple lytic bone and bilateral lungs metastases were established. Ventricular tachycardia and atrial flutter were documented. In spite of intensive care patient died. An autopsy was performed. It reveled polypoid, multilobar tumour with hemorrhagic surface that was protruding inside the right atrium. It was 9,0 × 1,6 × 1,1 cm in size and occupied the entire chamber. Histologically, the cardiac neoplasm was typified by proliferation of highly atypical cells, somewhere with intracytoplasmic vacuoles. Multiple irregular anastomosing vascular spaces and foci of necrosis and hemorrhages were seen. Tumour cells demonstrated strong expression of CD34, CD31, Flu1, FVIII, and were negative for SMA, calponin, caldesmon, desmin, EMA, Myog and panCK. Conclusion: In view of the presented case, primary heart sarcomas possess diverse clinical presentation, which predisposes to the high rate of false diagnoses and inappropriate therapy. At the same time, correct and prompt diagnosis of malignant tumours of the heart is extremely important. Interruption of Aortic Arch in an adult S. Singaravel * , P. Vaideeswar * Seth GS Medical College, Dept. of Pathology, Mumbai, India Objective: Interrupted aortic arch (IAA) is a rare anomaly representing approximately 1 % of congenital heart disease. It is characterised by luminal obliteration in the arch thereby leading to discontinuity between ascending and descending aortic segments. It may occur in isolation or be associated with other cardiac anomalies. Survival into adulthood is extremely rare. Method: We present the case of a 38 year old male with history of hypertension, diabetes and left hemiparesis 2 years ago. He had sudden unconsciousness and expired within 2 h of admission to the Emergency Services. Results: A complete autopsy was performed. The aorta was interrupted distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery (Type A interruption) and also showed an atherosclerotic aneurysm proximal to the interruption. The aorta distal to the interruption was supplied by a bunch of collaterals. The heart in addition showed bicuspid aortic valve and closed muscular ventricular septal defect. Cause of death was related to atherosclerotic critical coronary stenosis. Conclusion: Although it is extremely rare, IAA must be considered along with aortic coarctation in the differential diagnosis of an adult patient with hypertension refractory to medical management. Objective: We studied myocardial changes in cases of sudden death by anaphylactic shock. Method: We analyzed sudden deaths due to anaphylactic shock triggered by various allergens (insects, microorganisms, drugs, proteins). Results: Although they were autopsied only 7 cases diagnosed with death from anaphylactic shock, we found that cardiac changes were major. We observed inflammatory reactions, cardiac edema which dissecting myocardial fiber, undulation and myocardial fiber rupture, leukocyte influx. There were microgranulomas composed of eosinophils, macrophage and lymphocytes. In some cases there was necrosis of myocytes, small focal lymphocyte infiltrate, interfibrillar edema, fibroblasts and interstitial collagen. History of allergic reactions contributed to the diagnosis of anaphylactic shock. Conclusion: The cases of sudden death with anaphylactic trigger require careful observation of changes in myocardial area, which can be considered as belonging to allergic myocarditis, direct cause of sudden death. Objective: Metaplastic bone formation or heterotopic ossification on cardiac valves is a rare condition, which appears in one tenth of all calcified aortic valves. However, the association with extramedullary hematopoiesis is uncommon. We present an interesting case of sudden death in which the autopsy revealed only a calcific aortic stenosis. A 52 year-old male without any prior known medical history was found dead at home. A full autopsy was performed at Institute of Forensic Medicine of Tirgu Mures. Both external and internal autopsy observations were evaluated. Results: Autopsy examination identified advanced decompositional changes in all organs and calcified masses within the aortic cusps with protrusion through the outflow surface. Routine histopathological examination of the aortic valves revealed metaplastic lamellar bone and complete extramedullary hematopoiesis, consisting of erythroid cells, myeloid cells, megakaryocytes and adipose tissue. Conclusion: The pathways in the mechanism of the heterotopic calcification on cardiac valves could be related to some inflammatory, metabolic or genetic causes, but the presence of extramedullary hematopoiesis and extent of this condition on clinical status is poorly understood. Objective: Cardiac tumours are very rare with an autopsy incidence; 0.001-0.03 % and cardiac myxoma is the most common primary cardiac tumour. They are usually seen in female and in adult people, but rarely in children. Myxomas may be sporadic or part of genetic conditions. The cell origin of cardiac myxoma is still controversial and its histogenesis is making a sensation. Method: We evaluate four cardiac myxomas histologically and with immunohistochemistry methods. There was no evidence that they were part of genetic condition; Carney complex. In histologic examination all of the tumours were charachterized by the presence of stellate, polygonal (lepidic) cells in an amorphous, basophilic, afibrillar myxoid stroma containing mucopolysaccharides. Four cardiac myxomas were examined by immunohistochemical analysis with PGP 9.5, S100 and NSE. Results: In histologic examination all of the tumours were charachterized by the presence of stellate, polygonal (lepidic) cells in an amorphous, basophilic, afibrillar myxoid stroma containing mucopolysaccharides. All four myxoma showed positive immunohistochemically staining with PGP 9.5, NSE and S100. Conclusion: Altough the histogenesis of the cardiac myxoma is not obvious, it is postulated that they develop from multipotent mesenchymal stem. Herein we aimed to show the neuroectodermal origin of myxoma by immunohistochemically staining with neuroendocrine differentiation markers. Objective: The aim of the study was to evaluate the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9, gelatinase B) in left ventricular myocardium in the presence of chronic myocardial ischemia. Method: Heart specimens with persistent ischemia (n = 20, pre-infarction ischemic heart disease (IHD) group) and post-infarction scar (n = 20, post-infarction IHD group) from dissected males who had died suddenly (within 6 h) during the first or repeated acute attack of IHD (without congestive heart failure) and heart explants (n = 17, end-stage ischemic heart failure group) were analyzed. Heart specimens (n = 20) selected at the autopsy from the individuals who died from accidents were used as controls. The slides of myocardium were incubated with monoclonal antibody against the MMP-9 (clone 15 W2, Novocastra). Dako Real Envision visualisation system was employed to stain the samples. Results: Expression of MMP-9 in the cardiomyocytes of pre-infarction IHD group did not differ from that of control group. It was higher in the post-infarction IHD group (p < 0.05) as compared to controls and preinfarction IHD group, while the cardiomyocytes in the group of endstage ischemic heart failure had higher expression of MMP-9 in comparison to the post-infarction IHD group (p < 0.05). A number of myocardial interstitial cells expressing MMP-9 increased already in the pre-infarction IHD group (p < 0.05) as compared to controls. It was higher (p < 0.05) in the myocardium of post-infarction IHD group and the highest in the myocardium of patients with the end-stage ischemic heart failure. Conclusion: Expression of collagen-degrading MMP-9 is increasing in progression of ischemia-induced myocardial dysfunction. Objective: We present a rare case of aortic aneurysm fistulized into the esophagus and right pleural cavity. Method: A 64-year-old man without significant personal history excepting biliary lithiasis, presented with right upper abdominal pain radiating to the back and dyspnea, which was the dominant symptom. Soon after admission the patient presented a bleeding episode interpreted as hemoptysis. He died suddenly, before being investigated. The autopsy was performed 10 h later, at the department of pathology. Results: Postmortem examination revealed an extremely pale skin. The right pleural cavity contained 1200 ml hemorrhagic fluid. There was no blood within the respiratory tree. A longitudinal tear in the lower third of the esophagus with a fresh blood clot was found, communicating with an thoracic aorta aneurysm of 20 cm diameter. An old laminated thrombus was filling the aneurysm, which was adherent to the esophageal wall. The stomach contained a cast of coagulated blood, weighting 1000 g; the same content was found within the duodenum and jejunum. The abdominal aorta showed many complicated atherosclerotic plaques and saccular aneurysms. Conclusion: Although rare, fistulized aortic aneurysms must be considered in the differential diagnosis of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Performing autopsies in hospital practice is still useful, at least for teaching purposes. Results: 54 and 46 % were male and female subjects among which the lowest and highest age was 5 and 10 years respectively. Most common pH finding was 6.0,yellow color followed by straw color and clear white respectively. Highest specific gravity of urine was 1.015 (80 %) followed by 1.020 (44 %). Ketone bodies and bilirubin positivity were found in single sample each. 7 % of urine samples had bacteriuria along with 13 cases showed nitrite positivity. Two urine samples had trace amount, while one showed 1+ amount of glucose. The frequency of leukocyteuria showed trace, 1+ and plenty amount in nine, three and in one individuals respectively. Hematuria was found to be seen in 8 % cases with 2+ in one individual Eight students had positive protein value, of which seven had trace and one had 1+ in amount. One student had plenty of epithelial cells followed by 1+ and trace amount of epithelial cells by two and five students respectively. One had dumble shaped crystals followed by two having each of amorphous, phosphate, calcium oxalate and uric acid crystals respectively. The cross tabulations between the gender with presence of RBCs, WBCs, occurrence of heamaturia and bacteriuria showed significant p-values. Conclusion: Mass urinary screening proved to be an useful tool to identify children with asymptomatic progressive renal diseases. Furthermore, the delivery of the report and counseling them for further preventive measures may also help in improving their condition. Results: Fine needle aspiration guided by endoscopic ultrasound of the pancreatic mass was performed. Conventional smears and cell block cytology revealed small groups and isolated pleomorphic cells with abundant cytoplasm. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for Ca15.3, p53 (75 %) and HER-2, with negativity for Ca19.9, estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor. We discuss all aspects of the case management, emphasizing the importance of a careful evaluation of the clinical history and the importance of a multi-disciplinary approach. These aspects are important for a correct diagnostic process and an appropriate therapeutic choice when a pancreatic lesion develops in a patient with prior neoplasm. Objective: The skin of the head and face is habitually exposed to sunlight. Consequently, this exposure may cause of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma, cutaneous basal cell carcinoma and cutaneous melanoma. Method: Total of 64 cases (33 male,31 female) were included in the study. The oldest age was 95 and the youngest age was 23. 25 cases were diagnosed as BCC. 24 cases were diagnosed as SCC. 6 cases were diagnosed as seborheic keratosis. There were 2 melanoma in situ cases and they were both localized at face. Also there was 1 patient who were diagnosed as atypical spitz nevus which had been localized at gluteal region. Results: BCC was more common in women (56 %). Nose localization (36 %) and nodular subtypes (60 %) were commenest among others. SCC was more common in men (66 %). It was tend to be in ear and lower lip localizations (29 %). Well and moderately differentiated tumours were of equal amounts (50 %). 4 cases of SCC had been developed from keratoacanthoma. Patients who were diagnosed as BCC were younger than patients who were diagnosed as SCC (90-45/95-69) . Conclusion: This study, premalign and malign tumours were determined in the face localization mostly. Nose, lower lip and ear localization were frequency in malign tumours. Premalign and malign tumours were determined in the eyelid localization mostly. There were 24 patients younger than 18 years (36.9 %). The most common site of occurrence was upper extremity and second most common site was face. The main presenting symptom was a hard, subcutaneous, slowly growing mass. The size of the tumour ranged from 0.4 to 5 cm in diameter. Multiple occurrences were seen in 3 cases. All cases more or less showed the same histopathologic features of pilomatricoma such as shadow cells, basophilic cells, calcification, ossification and inflammatory cells. Conclusion: Pilomatricoma is a benign skin neoplasm of hair follicle matrix cells. It is often misdiagnosed with other skin conditions. The treatment of option is surgical excision and the recurrence rate is low. Histopathological study gives the certain diagnosis as clinical impression and fine needle aspiration cytology may be misleading. Objective: We present a case of a rare entity, Cutaneous melanoacanthoma (CM), traditionally considered to be a pigmented variant of seborrheic keratosis.CM is presented as a benign proliferation of melanocytes and keratinocytes usually existing over the head, neck and trunk of elderly people. Method: A 77 years old man presented with a polychrome pigmented patch of the left flank. The lesion was asymmetric measuring 2.3 cm. Melanoma and seborrheic keratosis were first suspected. Results: Microscopic analysis revealed acanthosis with proliferation including epithelial and melanocytic hyperplasia. There is no evidence of cytological atypia, pleomorphism or nuclear hyperchromasia. The dendritic melanocytes exhibit diffuse cytoplasmic expression of S100 and MelanA. Conclusion: Melanoacanthoma is a rare, pigmented, benign, mixed neoplasm, composed of dendritic melanocytes and proliferating epidermal keratinocytes.It usually occurs in elderly individuals, with no sex predilection and may be multiple. Clinically, it presents as an asymptomatic, slowly-growing, hyperkeratotic papule, plaque or nodular lesions with a diameter ranging from a few millimeters to several centimeters and are most frequently found on the head, particularly the lips. In our case, the lesion was cut a n e o u s s i t u a t e d a t t h e t r u n k . H i s t o p a t h o l o g i c a l l y, melanoacanthoma is characterized by numerous large dendritic melanocytes spread throughout the hyperplastic epidermis. Immunohistochemistry may be useful if there is a diagnostical doubt. Objective: The present study was designed to evaluate the Canine amniotic membrane (AM) as biological dressing for deep cutaneous wound artificially induced in rabbits. Method: Full term pregnant bitch was used to harvest canine amniotic membrane. Twenty seven New Zealand white male rabbits, were distributed into three groups of nine animals each. Then wound induction was done in all groups. The rabbits were divided into three main groups as follow: group I, wound area was covered by canine amniotic membrane, group II, wound area was dressed by Pividon Iodine and group III, wound area was not subjected to any type of dressing materials. Three animals from each group were sacrificed at 7,14 and 21 days P.W serum and wound granulation tissue samples were collected for estimation of oxidative stress indicators and hydroxyl proline content. Tissue specimens were fixed in formalin for histopathological, immunohistochemical examination. The results revealed increase in serum and tissue antioxidant levels while reduction in oxidative radicals in AM dressed wound compared with other groups while the hydroxyproline content was higher in AM dressed wound than other group. The histopathological examination revealed that reduction in inflammatory reaction in AM dressed wound with enhanced epithelization and fibroblast proliferation and collagen deposition that was confirmed by masson's trichrom. Conclusion: It was concluded that amniotic membrane is a useful and effective biological dressing that enhance wound healing. Objective: Folliculotropic mycosis fungoides (FMF) is a distinct variant of mycosis fungoides (MF) with its own clinical manifestations, histological features and biological behavior. Histological diagnosis is usually delayed due to subtle morphological alterations. The aim of the study is to highlight the typical microscopic skin changes that allow a correct diagnosis. Method: We present 3 cases of FMF followed by multiple clinical diagnoses. In each case among them there were lymphoma of the skin and others. Two patents were males aged 18 and 65 years and one was a 53year-old woman. Results: The histological hallmarks (n = 3) included perifollicular and intrafollicular infiltration with atypical T-cells, infundibulocystic structures (sometimes resembling milia), basaloid follicular hyperplasia, follicular mucinosis, syringotropism, numerous eosinophils around hair follicles and rare epidermotropism involving nonfollicular epithelium. There were also (n = 1) foci of hair follicles destruction revealed due to entrapped squamous cells and horn masses within dermal neutrophilic pustular lesions. A frequent feature (n = 3) was prominent Langerhans cell hyperplasia. Multinucleated giant cells were found within some hair follicles without evident adnexal distruction. Invariably, the atypical Tcells displayed a CD3+, CD4+ immunophenotype with only scattered CD8+ cells. In all cases a pronounced mixture of reactive T-and Blymphocytes and CD1a+ cells was found. Conclusion: The originality of follicle cystic lesions, weak nonfollicular epidermotropism, cellular composition of the infiltrate with immunohistochemical specification help to make the correct diagnosis of FMF and to distinguish it from another kind of follicular injury which can be seen in nontumour folliculitis, acne and secondary involvement of skin adnexa. Objective: The synovial is a rare site of tumour metastases with less than 40 cases reported in the literature. Although melanoma is a highly metastatic cancer, only two cases of synovial metastases have been reported. The aim of this case is to attract the attention of clinicians and pathologists on the importance of intra-articular metastatic localization including synovium. Method: The patient was 73 years old with no notable medical history. She complained of joint pain mimicking a knee sprain. Physical examination showed a swollen knee, red and painful. Radiological examination revealed a filling the joint space. A biopsy of synovium was practiced. Results: Microscopic examination showed a malignant tumour proliferation largely necrotic arranged in clumps or small nests within an inflammatory stroma. Tumour cells had eosinophilic cytoplasm without pigment melanin. The nuclei were large and highly mitotic with a prominent nucleolus. The immunohistochemical study objectified positivity of tumour cells for HMB45, vimentin and CD99. They were in contrast negative for CK, EMA and desmin. The diagnosis of synovial locating of cutaneous melanoma was retained. Conclusion: Metastasis of melanoma at the synovium is very rare. They generally occur at the stage of disseminated disease. The treatment is palliative. Results: It is histologically similar to salivary gland mixed tumours where, proliferation of epithelial and myoepithelial cells set in a myxomatous, chondromatous, or hyalined stroma. Mixed tumours composed of five histological criteria for diagnosis: 1) cuboidal or polygonal cell nests 2) tubuloalveolar structures lined with two or more rows of cuboidal cells 3) ductal structures with one or two rows of cuboidal cells 4) keratinous cysts 5) a matrix of varying composition. CS may have all five characteristics or manifest only some. Conclusion: The CS, or mixed tumour of the skin, was first described by Hirsch and Helwig, as a benign neoplasm of sweat gland origin and a rare clinical entity. The incidence of CS is <0.01 % of all primary skin tumours. It is usually located in the skin of the head and neck. Rare localization areas are the axilla, abdomen, trunk, genitalia and extremities in patients between the age of 20 and 60 years with a male predominance. CS lesions usually are not clinically distinctive and the diagnosis is made on microscopic examination. Objective: Syringocystadenocarcinoma papilliferum (SCACP) is a very rare cutaneous neoplasm, representing the malignant counterpart of syringocystadenoma papilliferum (SCAP). Only 28 cases have been reported, 9 of them as carcinoma in situ. Method: We present a case of a 64-year-old woman with a nodular mass on scalp that recurred 2 years after excision of the primary tumour. Results: Microscopically, the lesion composed of cystic duct-like structures that extend as invaginations from the surface epithelium into the underlying dermis. Cyst wall showed papillary projections lined by twolayered epithelium with nuclear atypia. Multilayering, increased mitotic activity and comedo necrosis were detected. Immunohistochemical study with p63, cytokeratin 14 and calponin showed continuous layer of myoepithelial cells throughout the lesion. A pathological diagnosis of SCACP in situ was rendered. Conclusion: SCACP has favorable prognosis, only 2 cases with local recurrence, 1 case with late recurrence and 3 cases with regional lymph node metastases have been reported up-to-date. Objective: Digital papillary adenocarcinoma (DPAC) is rare adnexal skin tumour with uncommon bone invasion and high recurrence rate. Method: We present a case of 32 year old female with history of multiple operations of ingrown nail in the past 12 years, and painful nail deformation of the toe. Clinical suspicion of osteomyelitis was made. Amputation was preformed and specimen was examined histologically. Results: On histology, tumour was composed of glands, solid sheets of epithelioid and spindle cells, and cystic spaces with micropapillae. Focally, clear cells, and apocrine and squamous differentiation were noted. Focal necroses, high mitotic rate (30 mitoses per 10 HPF) and bone invasion were present. SMA, calponin and vimentin were positive in solid areas, GCDFP-15, mCEA and EMA in glands, while S-100, cytokeratin and CK7 were positive in both areas. p63 was positive in solid sheets and around glands. Diagnosis of DPAC was made. Re-amputation and long-term follow up were suggested due to positive margins and bone invasion. Conclusion: DPAC should be included as differential diagnosis of tumours on acral site and with bone invasion. It can behave in aggressive manner, and long-term follow up is advised. Objective: Mohs micrographic surgery is distinguished by histologic examination of the complete surgical margin prepared from fresh frozen tissue. The purpose is to achieve the examination in one section of the undersurface, the sidewall, and the epidermal margin. To do so, the specimen must be manipulated before freezing, flattening it. Method: We compare 34 cases frozen by traditional method over a year, with 9 cases frozen by PrestoCHILL® over 3 months. Results: Traditional method required a mean of 15 slides while the new one only 10. Also the number of frozen blocks needed downgraded from 1.9 to 1. Freezing quality was also improved, and holes and tears seen in fat were also reduced. Conclusion: The manipulation of the skin while freezing is one of the pitfalls of this technique, since the flattening of tissue is done against gravity, and epidermal margins usually "fall". The solution to this particular problem requires several serial sections or cutting the specimen in more than 1 frozen block to solve. We tested PrestoCHILL® device to freeze the tissue, since the freezing is made faster and in contact of a flat metal surface, facing the margin (favored by gravity). Objective: Hydatidosis is a parasitic disease that occurs commonly in the liver and the lungs. Primary subcutaneous localizations are really rare. The authors report one case of subcutaneous hydatid cyst. Method: A 49 year old woman with no particular medical or surgical history presented with a painless swelling of the right thigh. Ultrasonography imaging showed a sub-cutaneous hypoechoic well limited non vascularised mass. a surgical excision was performed. Intraoperative findings were suggestive of an abscess. Pathological examination found inner germinal and lamellated layers of cyst wall that stains with PAS. Serology was performed and was positive. The patient has been followed for 3 months, and no findings associated with local or systemic hydatid cyst recurrence were detected. Results: In this case the histological findings were suggestive of hydatid cyst, and the final diagnosis was made after clinical, biological, radiological and histological confrontation. Conclusion: Subcutaneous hydatid cyst may be primary or secondary. The primary cysts are exceptional, however, it should be included in the differential diagnosis of any subcutaneous cystic mass, especially in endemic regions. Their diagnosis is based on the clinico-radiological findings and confirmation is histological. The treatment is surgical and the evolution is marked by fistulisation and recurrence. Objective: The malignant counterpart of spiradenoma, known as spiradenocarcinoma, or "carcinoma ex spiradenoma", is a very rare adnexal neoplasm of the skin. The low number of diagnosed cases, problematic classification and naming, the variability of the microscopic features represent reasons for the scarcity and fragmentation of the data regarding their evolution and prognosis. The aim of the present paper is to present a case of spiradenocarcinoma with axillary lymph node metastasis. Method: A 62-year-old woman presented with a 5/3 cm painful, firm, axillary tumour, fixed to the subjacent planes, which developed in 3 months and raised the suspicion of tumour originating in an ectopic breast tissue. The tumour and axillary lymph nodes were resected. A second tumour, previously diagnosed clinically as dermatofibroma, located on the external aspect of the upper third part of the arm, 3/2 cm in size, firm, with a fluctuant central area was resected and submitted to pathology department next day. Results: The axillary tumour was diagnosed as metastatic poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of unknown origin. The arm tumour showed the features of a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The continuity between areas with malignant appearance and remnants of pre-existing spiradenoma facilitated the diagnosis of spiradenocarcinoma. Conclusion: The present case illustrates the difficulties of clinical and morphological diagnosis of primary and metastatic spiradenocarcinoma and the possible aggressive behavior of some of the tumours in this category. Objective: Human Papillomavirus (HPV) associated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and SCC in situ (SCCIS) are reported in the genital region, in the digital skin is less well recognized, especially associated with HPV16. Digital SCC occur independently of the patient's immune status is more aggressive and can be difficult to treat. We reported 2 cases of HPV-associated SCCIS of the periungueal region in patient's immunocompromised. Method: We reported two men of 55 and 52-years-old with verrucous lesion on the right hand, in the third and first fingers, respectively. The first, had chronic linfatic leukemia with a history of a condyloma on the penis, and the second patient with human immunodeficiency virus (VIH), a history of a SCCIS on the mandibular angle associated with HPV16. A biopsy specimen and HPV genotyping test were performed. Results: Both patients, had SCCIS with HPV16. Tumours were treated by surgical excision and the first was treated with photodynamic therapy with no recurrence and the second patient, the lesion persist and he will receive radiotherapy. Conclusion: High-risk mucosal HPV types, such as HPV16, have an apparent predilection for the nailbed. These tumours necessitate prompt surgical treatment and close follow-up as they tend to be locally aggressive. Objective: Pilomatrixoma is a benign cutaneous tumour of hair matrix origin and characterized by the presence of subcutaneous nodules of up to 3 cm in diameter. It is usually seen in children and more frequently located in the head and neck. We present the case of a 52 years-old-woman with a 17 cm mass depending on the inner face of her left arm, who presented with constitutional syndrome and iron-deficiency anemia. Because of the large size and clinical symptoms, sarcoma was the first clinical suspicion. Method: Surgical resection was performed. Macroscopically, the tumour was pediculated with an expansive growth pattern and free surgical margins. Results: Histopathologic study revealed nodules of basaloid cells, which mature centrally to produce ghost cells. The stroma also showed numerous multinucleated giant cells of foreign body type and bone metaplasia. Numerous mitosis and atypical features were also seen, which made us consider the differential diagnosis of pilomatrix carcinoma and the proliferative variant of pilomatrixoma. Conclusion: The largest reported case was 24 cm pilomatrixoma presenting in the posterior thorax. Thus, our case is the second one and the largest located in the arm. Pilomatrixoma should be suspected in the differential diagnosis of giant adnexal tumours. Objective: Panniculitis is a rare emerging side effect of BRAF inhibitor(BRAFi) therapy used to treat patients with BRAF-mutated metastatic melanoma. Only 18 cases are documented in the literature. Method: We present two additional cases and review the clinicopathological findings of the cases reported to date. Results: Patient 1 was a 65-year-old female who presented with fever, rash, generalized arthralgia and painful nodules in the inferior and superior limbs panniculitis with a mixed infiltrate with numerous neutrophils and foci of necrosis and apoptosis. A diagnosis of vemurafenib-associated neutrophilic panniculitis was rendered and vemurafenib dosage was reduced with complete resolution of the lesions. Patient 2 was a 35-year-old female who, after 6 weeks of treatment with vemurafenib, developed painful nodules in the the inferior limbs. A punch biopsy showed a lobular panniculitis with neutrophilic infiltration without vasculitis. A diagnosis of vemurafenib-associated neutrophilic panniculitis was rendered. She was started on steroids with total remission of the lesions. Conclusion: BRAFi associated panniculitis can present under a range of histological presentations, documented in the literature and in our cases. As clinical course is generally benign, recognition of this side effect is important in order to prevent BRAFi discontinuation. Results: SC was more frequent in males and most commonly presented as a nodular ulcerated mass. Histopathologically, there were varying architectural patterns with irregular solid lobules of basaloid cells and variable sebocytic differentiation, areas of comedo-necrosis(four cases) and/or squamous differentiation(three cases); duct or cystic differentiation was seen too; one case was associated with SC "in situ" and pagetoid invasion of supraiacent epidermis. Infiltration of subcutaneous fat/skeletal muscle was evident in three cases. Six tumours were grade 2. All SCs presented at least focal positivity for EMA and adipophilin and intense p53 nuclear staining. None of them showed microsatellite instability. Conclusion: In our experience, SC is a rare tumour with morphology similar to BCC and SCC; EMA and adipophilin facilitate appropriate diagnosis. Objective: Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is a multifocal vascular neoplasia characterized by angioproliferative multifocal tumours, affecting mainly the skin. Lymphangioma-like Kaposi sarcoma (LLKS) variant is a rare morphologic expression, accounting for less than 5 % of all KS cases. Method: The first patient was a 76-year-old woman with erythematous plaque on right foot (3-4 cm). The second, a 61-year-old woman with erythematous papules on legs, arms and nose (<1 cm). The third, a 48year-old man with violaceous plaque (10 × 4cm) and numerous papules on left foot. Biopsies were performed, with subsequent studies through microscopy with HE staining. Results: Histopathological examination of specimens revealed a proliferation of dilated anastomosing empty channels lined by flattened endothelial cells, dissecting the dermis and surrounding pre-existing blood vessels in some areas. Lymphocytes and plasma cells were present in the stroma adjacent to vascular channels. Typical areas of KS were not present. Immunohistochemical studies for HHV8 and D2-40 revealed positive staining. Conclusion: LLKS variant of KS is very uncommon. Bulla-like lessions have been considered as a clinical hallmark. When findings of typical KS are not found, differential diagnosis with other vascular tumours may be difficult. Positive staining for HHV-8 can be useful to distinguish it from its mimics. Objective: Neurocristic hamartoma (NCH) is a rare lesion characterized by several lineages of differentiation, including melanocytic, nerve sheath and mesenchymal. So far, there are few (about 15) cases reported. Herein we describe a case of congenital NCH and review the literature. A 51 year-old man, without relevant previous clinical history, was referred to our hospital due to a large (18 cm dimension) cutaneous/ subcutaneous congenital lesion localized in the occipital region. The lesion was partially removed (spindle shape specimen, measuring 7.2 × 3.6 × 3.0 cm). Results: The epidermis was slightly brownish and lobulated. Histology revealed a complex lesion with interfolicular growth pattern, displaying nests with common melanocytic nevus and blue nevus-like features, neurofibroma and perineurioma-like components, characterized by immunohistochemistry. There were no signs of malignancy. Diagnosis: NCH. Conclusion: NCH is a complex hamartomatous lesion. The diagnosis might be challenging and misleading if not recognised. Due to the variability of NHC features it may raise several differential diagnoses, namely pigmented neurofibroma. Importantly, NCH has high propensity to melanoma transformation, but with better prognosis than classical melanomas. Objective: High risk Human papillomavirus (HR HPV) infection in non melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) was reported in several studies but its role in the development of these tumours is not yet established. To assess the involvement of HPV in the carcinogenesis of NMSC we evaluated the expression of Tp53 according to HPV infection. Method: 51 NMSC formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissues (21 squamous cell carcinoma, 13 keratoacanthoma and 17 basal cell carcinoma) were enrolled. HPV detection was performed by nested PCR (PGMY09/ PGMY11/GP5+/GP6+) and reverse line blot hybridization. The immunohistochemical expression of Tp53 was investigated using P53 monoclonal antibody (Novocastra). Tp53 was considered as over expressed if more than 30 % of nuclei stained positive. Results: HPV positive samples account for 50.9 % (26/51). HR HPV types were found in 80.1 % (21/26). Over expression of Tp53 was observed in 64 % of HPV negatives and it was significantly associated with the absence of HPV infection (p = 0.08). The over expression of Tp53 was not associated with the histological type of tumour. However, negative staining of Tp53 was found in 81 % of HR HPV types (p = 0.064). Conclusion: This study shows an inverse correlation between HPV infection and Tp53 positive staining. This could be explained, as in cervical cancer, by the role of E6 in the degradation of p53. Hence mucosal HR HPV could be involved in skin cancer carcinogenesis. Objective: Wilms tumour gene (WT1) is a tumour-suppressor gene located at chromosome 11p13 and antibodies against the product of this gene applicable to formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue have become available. These antibodies may stain both the cytoplasm and the nucleus of cells but only the nuclear immunreactivity must be evaluated for WT1 gene. Method: The expression levels of WT1 gene were examined in 60 primary thyroid neoplasms(30 papillary carcinomas, 30 follicular neoplasms) and 30 benign thyroid tissues (adenomatous hyperplasia) immunohistochemically. Results: There wasn't any difference between three groups and no expression of this gene product was detected in all groups. Only cytoplasmic staining that we ignored in oncocytic cells was seen. Conclusion: Nuclear reactivity of WT1 was shown in some kinds of tumours like Wilms tumour, mesothelioma,serous carcinomas of ovary and peritoneum, metanephric adenoma, as well as some types of leukemia. Papillary structures and psammoma bodies can be seen in papillary throid carcinoma as well as ovarian and peritoneal serous papillary carcinomas. Although, these two tumours resemble each other histopathologically, there was no expression of WT1 gene product in papillary throid carcinomas in our study. These findings showed that in the tumourigenesis of primary throid carcinomas WT-1gene has no role. Objective: To demostrate a rare case of isolated pituitary sarcoidosis in a 26-year-old man. Method: A 26-year-old patient complaining of a decrease in semen volume but without loss of libido sought advice from the urologist. Class III obesity, testicle shrinking, decreasing the blood level of pituitary hormones, adrenal insufficiency, hypothyroidism were found. MRI showed a sellar region tumour with infra-, supra-and parasellar extension. Clinical preoperative diagnosis was a craniopharyngioma. Transnasal transsphenoidal surgery was performed to remove the tumour. Histological samples were stained with haematoxylin-eosin, Masson's trichrome, CD3, CD38, CD68, HLA-DR, chromogranin A, synaptophisin. Results: A histologic study of the pituitary gland showed granulomas similar in size and morphology. They consisted of multinucleated giant cells, epithelioid cells, lymphocytes, histiocytes and a peripheral rim of fibrosis. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed rimmed granulomas. The central distribution of CD68+ cells and the peripheral distribution of CD3+ were detected. A chest CT scan revealed no evidence of thoracic pathology. Conclusion: The differential diagnosis for sarcoidosis in the pituitary gland after the MRI results is quite complicated. Immunohistochemical analysis enables to detect the monomorphic granulomas and to distinguish sarcoidosis from other granulomatous processes. Objective: Hypophysitis is a rare disease of pituitary gland. We report 5 cases of primary and secondary hypophysitis. Method: Among 207 examined pituitary masses removed through a transnasal-transsphenoidal approach, we reveal 5 cases of hypophysitis. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI of the pituitary gland, biochemical testing of pituitary hormone blood levels, histological examination with haematoxylin-eosin and Masson's trichrome staining were performed in this cases. Semi-quantitative immunohistochemical assay was carried out using antibodies to all pituitary hormones, Ki-67, CD3, CD38, CD45, CD68, HLA-DR. Results: Hypophysitis was diagnosed only morphologically in 2 women and 4 men at the age from 23 to 55 years. MRI showed an increase in the size of pituatuiry gland in 4 cases, 1 case was with cystic changes and 1 case was diagnosed as a craniopharyngioma. The morphological study identified the presence of an inflammatory infiltrate with fibrosis in all cases and with necrosis in one case. HLA-DR expression was observed in all cases. Secondary hypophysitis was diagnosed in 2 cases. Conclusion: Hypophysitis remains challenging to diagnose, because its clinical and imaging features are not specific to distinguish from those of pituitary tumours. The IHC/morphology analysis is the method of choice. Objective: ATRX is part of a chromatin remodeling complex that plays an important role in the repression of the Alternative Lengthening of the Telomeres pathway, preventing the continuous maintenance of the telomeres and the infinite proliferation of the cells. Inactivating mutations of ATRX characterize diffuse and anaplastic astrocytomas. We present a case of two metachronous pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms with loss of ATRX expression. Method: A male patient presented with multiple liver metastasis, received three different therapeutic regimens within 5 years after which a new liver biopsy was performed. Results: The first liver biopsy showed a G2 pancreatic neuroendocrine tumour which was Synaptophysin, Chromogranin, PDX-1 and Isl1 positive and CDX-2, PAX8, Progesterone negative. Insulin was detected in <5 % and the ki-67 index was 10 %. Five years later the new biopsy showed a G3 pancreatic neuroendocrine carcinoma which was focally and weakly TTF-1 positive and strongly CDX-2 positive while it was Isl1 and Insulin negative. ki-67 was 85 %. In both neoplasms ATRX was negative. Conclusion: According to literature inactivating mutations of ATRX are common in pancreatic neuroendocrine tumours. Loss of ATRX protein is associated with hepatic metastasis and decreased overall survival, although the tumour cells are more sensitive to agents such as 5-fluoracil. Objective: Actually with the current progress of the management of thyroid cold nodules and the improvement of pathological practices, there is a significant increase in the incidence of cancer Method: This descriptive study allows to identify retrospectively the number of cases of thyroid cancer in the pathology department of the University Hospital of Constantine during the period 2012-2014. The addressed surgical specimens were fixed in 10 % formalin. A thorough macroscopic examination of the piece, samples according lesions were performed. Lymph node dissection is included in full. After processing and inclusion of sections with a thickness of 3 μm thickness were cut and stained in eosin Hemalun .A immunohistochemical study with different antibodies was performed according to the diagnostic orientation. Results: In total, our series of 84 cases of thyroid cancer of all types collected during this period (2012) (2013) (2014) . The female thyroid cancer is evident in our series with a sex ratio female / male 3/1. The average age is 45 years for both sexes and the minimum age is 18 years. Of the 84 cases of thyroid cancer collected, 82 % are papillary carcinoma, 8 % are vesicular carcinomas, 5 % are poorly differentiated carcinomas. Anaplastic carcinoma and medullary carcinoma Each one represents 2.5 % of each of thyroid cancers. One case of Langerhans cell histiocytosis was objectified. Conclusion: The thyroid cancer is among the few tumours represent only 01 % of cancers of the entire body. However, mastery of the decision tree we observe a significant increase in the incidence of cancer that occurs mainly at the expense of papillary microcarcinomas good prognosis. Objective: Primary Pigmented Nodular Adrenocortical Disease (PPNAD) accounts for approximately 10 % of ACTH independent Cushing's syndrome, 50 % being sporadic and 50 % familial; associated with Carney complex. PPNAD is characterized by brown-black pigmented adrenocortical nodules. We present a rare case of PPNAD in Carney complex with strong familial association. Method: 21-year old female presented with features of Cushing's syndrome (weight gain, moon face, abdominal striae, hirsuitism and proximal muscle weakness, hypertension & diabetes) of 2 years' duration, lentigenes on the lower lip and medial aspect of the conjunctiva, multiple hyperpigmented spots over lower lips and eye lids. Breast nodularity noted. Basal cortisol was raised and ACTH normal. An uncle & three first cousins also showed lentigenes and similar pigmentation. CT abdomen showed bilateral multinodular adrenal enlargement. Patient underwent bilateral adrenalectomy and surgical specimens subjected to histological examination. Results: Both adrenals showed characteristic gross and microscopic features of PPNAD. The patient fulfilled diagnostic criteria of Carney complex. A strong paternal familial association observed. Conclusion: Patients with histopathological diagnosis of PPNAD should be investigated for Carney complex and familial association. Molecular genetic testing for characteristic mutation of the PRKAR1A gene is conclusive. Bilateral adrenalectomy indicated as mortality is same as in Cushing's syndrome. Objective: Oncocytic neoplasms of the adrenal glands are rare, usually nonfunctional and mostly benign. Herein, we report a case of an oncocytic carcinoma arising in the cortex of the right adrenal gland. Results: In a female patient, 55-years-old suffering from multiple sclerosis a right nonfunctional adrenal gland mass was found incidentally 3 years ago. During the last year the mass increased rapidly in size and was surgically excised. In the Pathology laboratory we received the right adrenal gland measuring 7.8 × 6.5 × 5 cm and weighting 94.8 g. Upon sectioning a circumscribed, encapsulated mass measuring 5.5 cm in greatest dimension and surrounded by a thin rim of normal-appearing adrenal gland, was noted. The mass was yellow-tan and exhibited a central radiating, stellate grey zone, of softer consistency. Microscopically, the neoplastic cells were arranged diffusely, in trabeculae or nests. The cells were large, polygonal with abundant granular and eosinophilic cytoplasm, with large hyperchromatic and pleomorphic nuclei. The mitoses were numerous, many of them atypical. Microscopic areas of necrosis were also noted. Upon immunohistochemical evaluation the neoplastic cells were positive for: vimentin, Melan A, synaptophysin and inhibin (focally) and were negative for: cytokeratins 7, 8, 14, 18 and 20, EMA, chromogranin, CD3 and CD163 . Peripherally, a thin rim of residual adrenal gland cortex was identified. Based on the existing criteria the diagnosis of oncocytic adrenocortical carcinoma was made. Conclusion: Oncocytic adrenocortical carcinomas are quite rare neoplasms, with less than 20 cases reported in the literature. In most published cases, similar to our case, they are nonfunctional tumours, and complete surgical removal is the treatment of choice. Objective: Large parathyroid adenomas (LPTA) weighing >2 g show distinctive clinicopathological features compared to small adenomas. All consecutive parathyroid adenomas (PA) were evaluated for clinicopathological and immunohistochemical (IHC) features with an aim to study the behavioural difference between small and large PA. Method: Clinical, biochemical and histological findings of 180 consecutive PAs in a 21 year period were reviewed. IHC was performed for parafibromin, APC, galectin-3 PGP9.5 and Ki67. All findings were compared between PAs of <2 and >2 g. Results: Ninety eight (54.5 %) adenomas were >2 g. Larger PAs showed significantly higher association with bony deformities including cystic lesions (p = 0.006), proximal muscle weakness (p = 0.009), hypercalcemia (p = 0.01), hypercalcemic crisis (p = 0.02) and elevated alkaline phosphatase (p < 0.001). No significant difference was noted in parathormone levels amongst the two groups. There was no significant association between weight and histological features. High expression of galectin-3 (p = 0.03) and PGP9.5 (p = 0.02) was seen in larger PAs (>2 g). Parafibromin, APC and Ki67 did not show any significant difference between two groups. Conclusion: More than half of parathyroid adenomas in Indians are larger than 2 g and qualify for LPTA. Despite having adverse clinical, biochemical and IHC features, they show benign histology. The mind map in pituitary/sellar pathology: A practical approach S. Ortiz * , F. Tortosa * Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Dept. of Pathology, Lisbon, Portugal Objective: Most sellar region masses are pituitary adenomas; however, this location is affected by a large number of pathologic entities. The aim of this work is to provide a practical, non-electron-microscopically based approach, for the daily practice of diagnosing and subclassifying adenomatous and non-adenomatous lesions of pituitary specimens. Method: Literature review and primary material from the Academic Medical Center in Lisbon (Santa Maria University Hospital). Results: The initial examination requires routine haematoxylin-eosin, to establish whether the lesion is a primary adenohypophysial proliferation or one of the many other types of pathology that occur in this area. After formulating a differential diagnosis, with a single mind map that easily illustrates the range of lesions present in the sellar region, the general pathologist can generate a confident final diagnosis with a few special stains and immunohistochemical markers that are now available to accurately classify these tumours. Conclusion: Adenomas and non-adenomatous masses can be easily diagnosed in a limited panel of stains and immunostains that can be used in daily practice at most centers. The complex and necessary subclassification of pituitary adenomas is now recognized to reflect specific clinical features and genetic alterations that predict targeted therapies for patients with pituitary disorders. Objective: Weiss criteria (WeC) have been proposed to distinguish between benign and malignant adrenocortical neoplasms(ACN). However, definitive criteria for malignancy are distant metastasis and/or local invasion. Our aim is to review the distribution of WeC and the clinical outcome of cases where the differential diagnosis of benignVSmalignant ACN was at stake. Method: We reviewed the slides and clinical files of 21 patients with ACN diagnosed at our institution (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) that showed a) ≥3WeC; b) <3WeC, but had concerning pathological features (weight ≥ 100 g and/ or size ≥ 6.5 cm) which prompted a closer follow-up of patients. Results: ACN with malignant behavior (n = 13) showed a median weight/size of 214 g/11.3 cm. Capsular invasion, nuclear grade III/IV and ≤25 % clear cells were the most frequently observed WeC on malignant neoplasms. Of the patients with ≥3WeC (n = 17), 13 (76 %) had a malignant behaviour (disease recurrence and/or metastases). Of the patients with ≥5WeC (n = 11), 7 (63 %) died of disease or its complications. All cases with <3WeC had a benign course, with patients showing no evidence of disease at present. Conclusion: The differential diagnosis of ACN is challenging. Despite concerns about their subjectivity, WeC seem to be useful on predicting malignant behaviour especially in cases with high scores. Close followup of patients with borderline scores is important. Objective: To establish the relationship between biomarkers expression (ATRX, HES1, mTOR, NOTCH1, VEGFR2 and MGMT) with predictive significance and the biological behavior of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours (GEP-NETs). Method: A retrospective evaluation of the total samples diagnosed as GEP-NETs (period 2003 was conducted, clinical and pathological characteristics were evaluated in all cases. Biomarkers expression was assessed trough immunohistochemistry using tissue microarrays <BR> Results: 143 cases of GEP-NET mainly from ileum/jejunum (23,8 %), appendix (19.6 %), colon/cecum/rectum (16,8 %) , pancreas (15,4 %) and stomach (14 %) were included. Average age was 55(11-83 years-old). Tumours were more frequent in males (61.5 %) and patients older than 18 years-old (93 %). Expression was positive in Hes1 (95.8 %), Notch 1 (91.6 %), ATRX (89.5 %), VEGFR2 (74.8 %) , PDGFR-β (62.9 %), mTOR (39.9 %), and MGMT (23.8 %). VEGFR was more commonly expressed in jejunum/ileum (p: 0.00; OR: 0.24 IC95% 0.10-0.57), cecum/ colon/sigmoid (p:0.02; OR: 5.84; IC95%:1.06-31.98) and in grade 2 GEP-NETs (p = 0, 01). MGMT lost expression more commonly in appendix (p: 0.00; OR: 0.13 IC95% 0.02-0.76). Finally, a significant loss of expression of MTOR in colon/sigmoid/cecum (p: 0.03; OR: 0.34 IC95% 0.12-0.95) was identified Conclusion: Our results must conduct to new studies focused on strict follow up of specific alternative therapies (alkylating agents, oxaliplatinbased chemotherapy, growth factor and protein kinase inhibitors) and biomarkers expression to evaluate a possible improve in survival rates of this patients <BR> Objective: Lymphoepithelial cysts of the thyroid ("branchial cleft-like cyst") are very rare lesions which may arise from intrathyroidal remnants of branchial derivatives, frequently associated with Hashimoto or chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis. They may coexist with thyroid carcinoma, but are not related pathogenetically. Method: We present two cases of a 66 respectively 41-year-old woman with a cyst located on the left lobe of thyroid gland and isthmus region, diagnosed in the Pathology Department "St.Spiridon" University Hospital with histopathological examination and immunohistochemically analysis. Results: Each cyst was lined by a stratified squamous epithelium associated with an abundant lymphoid tissue with reactive germinal centers. Benign lymphoepithelial lesions can be mistaken with Warthin-like tumours because of the presence of oncocytic metaplasia. Immunohistochemically, squamous epithelium was positive for CK19 and CK5, but negative for HBME1 and CD56. Oncocytic metaplasia was positive for CK19, HBME1, CD56 and negative for CK5. In both cases the thyroid parenchyma shows Hashimoto's thyroiditis and multifocal conventional papillary thyroid carcinoma (0.1-1.5 cm). Conclusion: Lymphoepithelial cysts of the thyroid are very rare, their association with carcinoma is occasional and the immunohistochemically analysis may be useful for differentiating from Warthin-like tumours. Objective: Endocrine pathologies can cause wide scope of symptoms and objective changes, ranging from asymptomatic to life-threatening acute course. Although amyloid goiter is usually symptomless, in advanced stage the rapid thyroid enlargement can suggest an aggressive carcinoma, thymoma or lymphoma. Our objective is to report an advanced, lifethreatening amyloid goiter associated with initial carcinogenesis. Method: Patient's medical history, clinical and laboratory investigations, as well as the treatment and surgical pathology data were retrospectively reviewed. Results: A 65-year-old woman underwent emergency hospitalisation because of dyspnoea and dysphagia. Blood tests were within laboratory reference ranges. Computed tomography showed a large retrosternal pathological mass that compressed trachea for 80 %, oesophagus, brachiocephalic veins. Total thyroidectomy was performed. Grossly, right lobe measured 11.5 × 10.5 × 6 cm, left-10 × 7 × 5 cm; both lobes were multinodular. By microscopy, the whole gland was composed of atrophic follicles surrounded by fat cells and eosinophilic homogenous deposits exhibiting positive reaction with Congo red and apple-green birefringence under polarized light. Papillary microcarcinoma measuring 0.4 cm was discovered in the right lobe. The postoperative period was uneventful. Conclusion: Amyloid goiter can initially be clinically silent while causing life-threatening situations in advanced stage. Although follicles are atrophic, carcinogenesis can be induced as confirmed by the incidentally found papillary microcarcinoma in the present case. Objective: Paragangliomas are rare neuroendocrine tumours arising from the extra-adrenal autonomic paraganglia. They have been described at any site where autonomic ganglia were found. This report describes six cases of paraganglioma occurring in various locations. Method: All patients were women with a mean age of 44 years-old. They were presenting in two cases with a carotid body tumour, in two cases with an abdominal mass associated in one case to spells of headache, palpitations and flushing, in one case with intra-peritoneal mass and the last one, the patient presented with catecholamine-secreting symptoms associated to paraganglioma. Results: Histologic examination revealed in four cases an encapsulated benign neoplasm composed of characteristic clusters of epithelioid cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in a nested pattern and peripherally surrounded by some spindle-shaped cells. These features are typical of paraganglioma. In the other case, characteristic paraganglioma have been diagnosed in association to a benign nerve tumour composed of Schwann cells. In the last case, capsule and vascular invasion were noted. Objective: Primary leimyosarcoma of the adrenal gland (PLA) is an extremely rare mesenchymal adrenal tumour with only 30 documented cases available in the literature. PLA is believed to originate from the smooth muscle walls of the adrenal vena branches. A case of PLA is described. Method: A 69 years-old Caucasian female, presented with a 6 months history of pain in the right flank. Radiological investigation detected an heterogeneously mass with a maximum diameter of 8 cm, located in the right adrenal area. No other neoplastic mass was revealed. The patient underwent transperitoneal right adrenalectomy. Surgery detected widespread adrenal and vena cava invasion. Postoperative recover was uneventful. Local adjuvant rathiotherapy was planned. Results: Histologically, a mesenchymal tumour of spindle shaped cells, in close vicinity to the adrenal parenchyma, was revealed. Tumour cells with moderate nuclear pleomorphism and occasional bizarre features had abundant intracytoplasmic glycogen. A mitotic activity of 7-8 mitoses /10hpf and areas of necrosis were demonstrated. Neoplasm was immunoreactive for SMA, vimentin, desmin, HHF35, h-caldesmon, an immunophenotype compatible with leimyosarcoma. Conclusion: In view of the rarity of this tumour and the absence of any hormonal derangement or imaging characteristics, the diagnosis is based entirely on histological and immunohistochemical evaluation. Objective: Graves' disease is an autoimmune hyperthyroidism caused by excessive thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb). Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) persists mainly in human B lymphocytes. We have reported that TRAb-predisposed EBV-infected cells (TRAb(+)EBV(+) cells) could produce TRAb in response to EBV-reactivation in both patients and controls. In this study, we compared the amount of total immunoglobulin (Ig)G and IgM produced during EBV-reactivation induction between patients and controls. Method: We separated PBMCs of 9 Graves' disease patients and 9 controls, and cultured for 2 days. The cultured PBMCs were then transferred to 33°C to reactivate persistent EBV. We collected culture medium and measured Ig concentration by ELISA at day 0, 5, 10, 12. At the same time, we confirmed AID-mRNA expression of culture cells. Results: We observed biphasic production of IgG and IgM in day 0 and day 10, 12. The increase in day 0 may be influenced by pre-culture; thus, the rise in day 10, 12 would be production induced by EBV reactivation. Conclusion: In our previous data, EBV-induced TRAb production in Graves' disease patients was higher than that of controls. However, in this study, total Ig secretion was not different between patients and controls, suggesting the polyclonal B cell activation. Objective: Nasal polyposis is one of the common and disturbing diseases in otolaryngology. Few researches were done about sex steroid receptors in nasal polyps till yet. In this study, the difference between estrogen and progesterone receptors (ERs & PR) expression in nasal polyps due to gender, has been investigated. Method: In this cross-sectional study, 90 samples of nasal polyps were studied after polypectomy in Mostafa Khomeini Hospital-Tehran Iran, during 2007 to 2011. Information about sex and age of patients detected from their medical documents. Three slides were prepared from every paraffin embedded block by 3 μm cuts. One slide with Hematoxylineosin and 2 others by Immunohistochemistry were stained, and percentage of ERs and PR-positive cells determined in the epithelium using monoclonal antibody, via light microscopy. Results: In this research, 36.6 % of samples belong to women and 63.3 % belong to men. There was no significant correlation between ERs & PR expression with age. A significant correlation was seen between ERs and sex (p = 0.001), while no significant association found between PR and sex. Conclusion: As regards the incidence of ERs in females are significantly more than males; it can be used as an effective factor in pathogenesis for treatment of polyps. Results: Histological examination with haematoxylin and eosin stain disclosed samples of normal adenohypophysis and a small spindle cell tumour. At immunohistochemistry, the latter was negative for pituitary hormones, cytokeratins, GFAP and chromogranin and positive for S100, vimentin and TTF-1. Staining for EMA was observed focally. Proliferation index evaluated with Ki67 immunohistochemistry was 1 %. Histological and Immunohistochemical findings were consistent with pituicytoma. Conclusion: Association of ACTH-dependent Cushing's disease and pituicytoma represents a rare event. Only four cases were previously described in the English literature: in two male and in two female patients, one of whom was 7-year old child. The relationship between these diseases has not been explained; however it may likely depend upon their origin from a common progenitor cell. Objective: Up to 95 % of insulinomas are benign neuroendocrine neoplasias without evidence neither of metastases nor recurrence. The absence of metastatic potential is determined by low proliferative index and intracellular contacts condition. Method: The study based on the surgical pathology material obtained from 23 patients with sporadic pancreatic insulinoma (NET). 21 tumour ware grade 1 (pT1) and only 2 tumours-grade 2 (pT2) (WHO, 2010) . Diagnosis of insulinoma was confirmed by IHC. All cases were undergone to EM (G1-21 cases and G2-2 cases) (JEOL JEM 100-CX). Results: There were two types of B-cells: 1-with large clear nuclei; 2with dark nuclei. We noticed the dissolution of cell membranes on the majority of inter-cell borders longitude. The cells were connected by means of desmosomes. After dissolving of the cellular membranes secretory granules were seen to migrate from one cell to another. There was no evidence of destructive any other cell structure. Dark cells had predominantly hormone-secreting function and between contacts dark cells more frequently demonstrated their membrane preservation. Dissolution of dark cell membrane caused the transfer of the granules in to clear cells. Neuroendocrine cells lacked the ability for invade intracellular matrix, so they excreted granules in the adjusted cells. Conclusion: Electron microscopy revealed no evidence of malignancy in cases of cell membrane dissolution with desmosomes saving. That phenomena reflects high cell activity secreting the granules in the intracellular space a s well in the adjusted cells. Objective: Parathyroid carcinoma is the rare malignant disease of endocrine tumour. The incidence is less than 1 % of all patients with primary hyperparathyroidism in Western countries. Method: Two patients with a diagnosis of parathyroid carcinoma in Khon Kaen hospital were included for this review. Results: The first case was a 24-year-old woman who had a midline neck mass for 4 months. Her blood calcium was 18.7 mg/dL. On examination, she has a firm midline neck mass is about 4 cm in diameter and movable. The total thyroidectomy was performed. The pathological diagnosis was parathyroid carcinoma. After that, she was loss follow up. The second case report was a 53 years old lady present to the hospital complaining fatigue and midline neck mass. The investigation revealed severe hypercalcemia and hyperparathyroidism. Surgical exploration revealed an enlarged left parathyroid mass, 2.5 cm. Histological findings and immunohistochemical report confirmed as parathyroid carcinoma. Conclusion: Parathyroid carcinoma is a rare endocrine malignant tumour. Furthermore, the diagnostic criteria have always been a challenge for pathologists. It's very important to carefully evaluate this lesion on histological diagnosis and also require the clinical data for correlation. In complicated cases, the suggestion from expert endocrine pathologists is needed. Objective: Although C-cell hyperplasia (CCH) is frequently observed in thyroids of patients with hereditary and sporadic medullary carcinomas(MC), it has also been observed in other neoplastic and nonneoplastic conditions. The study aimed to clarify the type and frequency of CCH in different thyroid lesions. Method: Thyroid tissue samples in distance >1 cm from nodule (18 cases of MC: 3 hereditary, 15 sporadic; 20 cases of papillary carcinomas; 20 cases of chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis) were analyzed. C-cells were identificated by immunohistochemical staining for calcitonin. The criterion of CCH was >50 cells per (x100) field. Results: We revealed reactive CCH in 7(39 %) thyroids with MC, 2(10 %) with papillary carcinoma, 4(20 %) with thyroiditis. CCH was focal in 9(69 %), diffuse and nodular in 4(31 %): in 2 cases of MC, in 2 cases of thyroiditis. Neoplastic bilateral CCH in 3 cases of MC was found, and groups of C-cells estimated as intrathyroidal spread of MC in 4 cases. C-cells showed different sizes and form, mild to moderate nuclear pleomorphism, and cytoplasm parameters widely varied. In 5(38 %) cases of CCH fibrotic response to cells was noted. Conclusion: Calcitonin-stained sections of thyroid tissue with MC helps to diagnose multifocal growth, early medullary microcarcinomas or intrathyroidal spread of MC. Bilateral medullary thyroid microcarcinomas associated with neoplastic C-cell hyperplasia and primary hiperparathiroidism, suggestive for a MEN2A syndrome A. Borda * , A. Farcas, A. Nechifor-Boila, A. Loghin, L. Chinezu, N. Berger * UMF Tirgu-Mures, Dept. of Histology and Pathology, Romania Objective: This case presentation aims to highlight the utmost importance of providing the pathologist with patients' clinical data together with the resected specimen. Method: A total thyroidectomy specimen and the right inferior parathyroid adenoma (PA) of a 31-year-old male was submitted to the pathology department of Tirgu-Mures county hospital, with the diagnosis of nodular goiter and PA. Results: Macroscopically, two whitish nodules of 3 and 4 mm, simetrically situated in superior-part of right and left lobes were found. Microscopically, the nodules were well-defined and composed of nests of spindle or globular cells, with finely granular abundant cytoplasm, with spindle-cells arranged in swirls, separated by fine bands of fibrosis. Immunohitochemically, they expressed calcitonin and chromogranin but no thyroglobulin. Secondary foci of medularry thyroid microcarcinoma (MTMC) and neoplastic C-cell hyperplasia were noticed in both lobes. The PA had an usual microscopical-appearance. Suspicion of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) was raised. Reviewing the medical history, we found that 6 years before, the patient had undergone bilateral adrenalectomy for bilateral pheocromocytoma and consecutively a MEN2A syndrome was genetically confirmed. Conclusion: Given the small size of tumours, in the absence of correct clinical information, the pathological examination could miss the presence of MTMC, with impact on clinical management of the patient. Complex parathyroid tumours-importance of histopathological diagnosis in patient management. P. Chengot * , T. Cvasciuc, M. Lansdown * Leeds Teaching Hospitals, Histopathology, United Kingdom Objective: Parathyroid carcinoma is an extremely rare, and poorly understood endocrine malignancy, and causes an estimated 0.005 % of all human cancers and about 1 % of primary hyperparathyroidism. Preoperative diagnosis is challenging and definitive diagnosis can only be made with specialised histological techniques. Due to its low incidence, there is a lack of evidence-based treatment guidelines. The identification and management of these cases have been especially challenging to clinicians. Method: Retrospective analysis of patients who underwent parathyroid surgery (primary and renal hyperparathyroidism) in a tertiary center between January 2011 and December 2015 for complex parathyroid tumours (atypical adenomas, hyperplasia and parathyroid carcinoma). Results: 219 parathyroidectomies were carried out during this period, of which 11 (5 %) were complex parathyroid tumours, with a subdivision of 4 parathyroid carcinomas, 6 atypical adenomas and 1 atypical hyperplasia. Mean age was 49.9, F>M, 9 sporadic and 2 familial. Mean serum ca 3.2 mmol/l and mean PTH 75.8 pmol/l. 9 had Vit D deficiency. Frozen section was used in half of the cases. All parathyroid carcinoma cases had bilateral neck exploration.5 patients had ipsilateral thyroid lobectomy. 1 patient developed multiple neck and lung metastases with several repeat surgeries. Conclusion: Diagnosis of complex parathyroid tumours is made by histology. High suspicion preoperatively in patients with marked elevated serum calcium and PTH could guide surgery extent. Patient with parathyroid carcinomas and atypical adenomas should be offered a long term follow-up for early detection of recurrences. Objective: Nesidioblastosis is a rare condition characterized by hyperplasia and hypertrophy of pancreatic islet cells and presence of islets in intimate association with ducts. Mediastinal teratoma with pancreatic tissue is also rare. Herein, we report a case of nesidioblastosis and pancreatic islet cell hyperplasia in a mediastinal mature teratoma in an adult. Method: 32-year-old male presented with chest discomfort and revealed to have a large mass in his anterior mediastinum. The patient underwent an excision of the mass with a clinical diagnosis of mediastinal teratoma. Histologic examination including hematoxylin-eosin stain and immunohistochemical stains were performed. Results: Histologically, the mass showed large areas of mature pancreatic tissue with various elements including intestine, squamous epithelium, skin appendages, respiratory epithelium, bone, cartilage, and fat which were supporting the diagnosis of a mature teratoma. In the area of pancreatic tissue, diffuse and non-mass forming hyperplasia of pancreatic islet cells was observed. Ductulo-insular complexes were also frequently noted. The hyperplastic cells were positive for neuroendocrine markers in immunohistochemical stains. Conclusion: We report a very rare case of nesidioblastosis and pancreatic islet cell hyperplasia arising in a mediastinal teratoma. The patient has stayed healthy without any endocrine symptom during 10 months after surgery. Objective: Papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) showing squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) differentiation is rare, and may appear in metastatic site rather than the primary site. We reviewed the clinical and histological features of this rare occurrence. Method: The histological findings of a transformation of a metastatic PTC into SCC are described with a review of the related literature. Results: A 84-year-old female, presented with a 4-year history of an enlarging right-sided neck mass. Cervical ultrasonography followed by computed tomography (CT) revealed a 6 cm cm solido-cystic mass, associated with two thyroid nodules. A fine needle aspiration of this mass suggested a SCC. Clinical examination, panendoscopy, CT scan and nasopharyngeal biopsy didn't reveal any possible primary site for this SCC. Histopathological examination of the total thyroidectomy specimen revealed a multifocal classic PTC with bilateral lymph node metastasis. The resected mass showed a biphasic tumour comprising area of PTC merging with moderately differentiated SCC. Four months later, she developed SCC recurrence in the neck's soft tissue. After surgery, the patient was referred for external beam radiotherapy. Conclusion: Transformation of differentiated thyroid cancer into SCC is rare and was puzzling in our case. Such a transformation usually confers a poor prognosis. E-PS-05-032 Macrofollicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: A rare but "tricky" papillary carcinomas subtype C. Cacchi * , A. Heinzel, R. Knüchel-Clarke * RWTH-Aachen, Pathology, Germany Objective: We want describe a case of this extremely rare variant, focusing about the differential diagnosis. Method: Having a "cold" nodule in Hystmus and goiter condition, a 52 years old patient was referred to surgery. Macroscopically a relatively well demarcated colloidal 3.8 cm nodule has been observed. Formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissue samples of this thyroid colloidal nodule have been examined in the HE routine stain. To support the final diagnosis an Immunostain with HBME-1 was also performed. Results: Microscopically the tumour, capsulated, was characterized by the large size of its follicles. They represented the great majority of the lesion. The thyreocytes showed larger nuclei, sometimes irregularly spaced, clear chromatin and "grooves". Some follicles were lined by cells with on slight enlarged nuclei with dark chromatin. Focally small, abortive papillae have been noted. To confirm the suspicion of a macrofollicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma (MFVPTC) the tumour cells exhibit a membrane-apical reaction for HBME-1. Conclusion: It is important to identify this subtype because in the routine it can be easily underdiagnosed as hyperplastic nodule or follicular adenoma. To avoid a misdiagnosis careful search for cytological atypia is important: lymph node and distal metastasis are present respectively in 20 and 6 % of cases. Objective: To report an exceedingly rare case of ectopic intrathyroidal thymoma. Method: Tumour samples were colored with HE and a large panel of antibodies were used. Results: A 62-year-old tunisian woman presented with multinodular thyroid gland. The right lobe included an encapsulated, firm nodule of 7 × 5 × 3 cm. In the other lobe were two nodules of 0,8 and 2,5 cm. Microscopic examination of the right lobe showed a highly cellular tumour with sclerotic bands forming incompletely demarcated nodules. The tumour was made of monotonous spindle cells within a lymphoid stroma. Immunohistochemically, cells was intensely positif for cytokeratin and Pax8 but not for TTF1, Thyroglobulin, calcitonin, CD5 and CD117. Ectopic normal thymic tissue was found at the periphery of the tumour. Residual thyroid tissue was absent. This immunohistochemical profile and the biphasic histologic pattern were considered characteristic of a type AB thymoma. The samllest left nodule matched with a nonencapsulated papillary microcarcinoma. Conclusion: Intrathyroidal thymoma is rare especially in old adults. It seems to arise in ectopic intrathyroid thymus. Proper diagnosis requires appropriate histopathologic assessment and staining, which in turn requires an awareness of a clinical index of suspicion for this condition. Objective: Gastrointestinal tract is the most common extranodal site involved by lymphoma, representing about 5-20 % of all cases. Histopathologically, roughly 90 % of the primary gastrointestinal lymphomas are of B cell lineage with very few T-cell lymphomas and Hodgkin lymphoma. However, primary gastrointestinal lymphoma is extremely rare, accounting for only 1-4 % of all gastrointestinal malignancies with DLBCL (Diffuse, large B-cell lymphoma) and MALT (Lymphomas of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue)being the most common entities, while mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) accounts for less than 1 %. Method: We report the case of a 74-year-old male presenting with a 5month history of abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting. Gross examination of the specimen revealed two gastric masses: a 10/8/ 2 cm smaller mass with a crater-like ulcerating area of 3/1/0.5 cm located in the fundus and a 14/12/3 cm larger mass located near the antrum. Invasion was found in 18 out of the 22 examined lymph nodes (from both greater and lesser curvature of the stomach). Objective: Here we present a case of a hepatic flexure colon tumour of 61-year-old woman with no history of lung tumour. Method: Immunohistochemistry was applied and 50 genes were analyzed by next generation sequencing technology (NGS). Results: An ulcerated, 5 cm-in-diameter tumour invaded the entire thickness of colon. The cancer contained medium to large size neoplastic cells with evident nucleoli with some focal features of adenocarcinoma that constituted less than 30 % too little to designate the tumour as mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma (MANEC). It was diagnosed poorly differentiated neuroendocrine predominantly large cell carcinoma of colon ("unfortunate" (according to Odze & Goldblum) category G3: WHO 2010) (pT3 N0: 7th edition pTNM). CK1AE/AE3 staining was predominantly membranous with partial distribution in dot-like pattern in perinecrotic cancer fields to be reminiscent of small cell carcinoma of lung counterpart. Ki67 labeled over 90 % of cancer cells with partial positive nuclear staining for TTF1. To our surprise no lymph nodal metastases were revealed in H&E staining as well as lymph nodes didn't show keratin positive deposits of cancer cells in labeling with CK1AE/ AE3. We detected nonsense mutations in four tumour suppressor genes (APC R1114X (molecular evidence that the cancer was a primary tumour of colon), TP53 R113X, RB1 E137X and FBWX7 R393X & S282X) and mutations in three receptor tyrosine kinases (RET A919V of high transforming activity, EGFR E114K and FLT3 L601I). Conclusion: Gene profiling of this rare carcinoma confirmed its primary colon origin in differential diagnosis to be helpful in choice of postsurgical treatment therapy option. Objective: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is observed in 5.5-13.5 % of patients with ulcerative colitis (UC) and in 0.4-0.8 % of patients with Crohn disease (CD). The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship between COX-2 and FasL expression in colon mucosa of patients with CRC, UC and CD in order to assess its value for prognosis of CRC. Method: Expression of COX-2 and FasL was analyzed immunohistochemically in the samples of colon mucosa taken from the affected areas of 10 CRC patients CRC, 4 UC patients, 6 CD patients with CD and from unaffected areas of 7 CRC patients. Results: Average expression of FasL in both unaffected and affected areas of CRC patients was higher than in CD patients. Average expression of FasL in affected areas of CRC patients was higher than in UC patients and the same as in unaffected areas. Multiple linear regression analysis has shown that FasL expression together with the duration of anti-COX-2 treatment was among the strongest predictors of COX-2 expression. Conclusion: The revealed strong relationship between COX-2 and FasL expression in CRC, CD and UC patients supports the possibility to use expression of FasL as a prognostic marker of efficacy of anti-COX-2 treatment and probability of tumourogenesis. Objective: To test the hypothesis that non-syndromic intestinal lipomas might represent a sporadic counterpart of lipomatous tumours occurring in PDGFRA-mutant syndrome. Method: A series of 20 intestinal lipomas were obtained from 17 patients and mutational analysis of exons 12, 14 and 18 of the PDGFRA gene (accession number D50017) was performed using PCR and direct sequencing. Results: M/F ratio was 8/9, age of the patients ranged from 45 to 84 years (average: 64.7). One patient presented with 3 lipomas, another one with 2 lipomas, 15 patients each had only 1 lipoma detected. DNA of 4 tumours was non-analyzable, all remaining 16 tumours were found to bear wildtype alleles of exons 12, 14 and 18 of PDGFRA gene. Conclusion: PDGFRA-mutant syndrome is a genetically defined subtype of Familial GIST syndrome. Although PDGFRA-mutated GISTs, Vanek's tumours and fibrous tumours are known to occur also in nonsyndromic sporadic setting, sporadic PDGFRA-mutated lipomas have not been recorded yet. Our first study didn't show PDGFRA mutations in any of the 16 analyzable tumours. Thus, PDGFRA mutations probably do not play an important role in the development of sporadic lipomas of the intestines. Objective: To evaluate the possible role of immunohistochemical detection of phoshorylated ribosomal protein S6 (PS6) in the differential diagnosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and its benign mimics in small endoscopical biopsies. Method: We collected a series of 30 specimens of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), 5 specimens of esophageal granular cell tumours (GCT), and 6 specimens of esophageal squamous cell papillomas (SCP). The histological diagnosis was correlated with abnormal staining of PS6 (at least 5 contiguous basal cells in the superficial epithelium) and with abnormal staining of p53. Results: 29 (96.7 %) cases of SCC showed pathological expression of PS6. All cases of SCC showed abnormal expression of p53. 2 (40 %) cases of GCT were PS6 positive, 3 (60 %) showed overexpression of p53, but only 1 tumour showed abnormal staining for both markers. 2 (33.3 %) cases of SCP were PS6 positive, 3 (50 %) showed at least focal overexpression of p53, 2 of these showing abnormal staining for both markers. Conclusion: Although this first preliminary study of esophageal squamous cell lesions suffers from a small number of cases, the results seem to support the thesis that adding immunohistochemical investigation of PS6 may increase accuracy of differential diagnostics of squamous cell proliferations of the esophagus. Objective: The objective of this study was to study the expression of WT1 in neurogen appendix and the relationships to Bcl2 protein. Neurogen appendix (NAP) is relatively frequently encountered in adults and is supposed to interfere with motility and fecal stagnation. The S100protein is consistently expressed in such lesions. Recently, WT1 expression has been reported in peripheral nerves and neuromas. Method: WT1 and Bcl2 expression was studied by immunohistochemistry in 18 NAP previously confirmed by S100 positivity. The expression was evaluated as negative, focal (<50 % stained cells) and diffuse (≥50 %). The Kendall rank correlation test was used for statistical analysis. Results: The gender ratio was 11/7 (man/woman) and the age range 21-79 years. 15 NAP associated to acute appendicitis and 3 associated to subacute appendicitis. WT1 was expressed focally in 6 and diffusely in 11 NAP. WT1 expression correlated to increased age and male gender (p = 0.06/tau = 0.333 and, p = 0.09/tau = 0.299, respectively) . Focal Bcl2 expression was seen in 5/11 WT1-positive NAP. Conclusion: In conclusion, the results of our study suggest that WT1 was expressed in almost all cases of NAP, suggesting a potential use as neurogen marker. WT1-positive NAP were more frequently associated to acute than to subacute appendicitis. The co-expression of Bcl2 suggests a possible interference with programmed cell death/apoptosis/necroptosis. Objective: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common worldwide cancer. it is the fourth most common worldwide overall cause of cancer death. Autophagy has been highlighted as a promising molecular target in cancer. Detecting LC3 has become a reliable method for monitoring autophagy and autophagy-related processes, including autophagic cell death. Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent cytoplasmic transcription factors. microRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs which post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression. Method: Twenty five CRC and 25 normal mucosa specimens were obtained. Immunohistochemical assessment of LC3 expression and assessment of STAT3 and microRNA 101 expressions by real time-PCR were done. Results: Revealed a statistically significant increase in LC3 (p < 0.001) and STAT3 expression in tumour samples (mean ± SD = 6.31 ± 1.96 folds) than normal mucosa (p < 0.001). Both of them were directly correlated together (r = 0.833, p < 0.001). MicroRNA 101 was inversely correlated to both LC3 and STAT3 (p < 0.001) and was significantly reduced in tumour samples (mean ± SD = 0.37 ± 0.16 folds) (p < 0.001) with a possible correlations to tumour grade (p = 0.006), pathological stage (p = 0.009) lymph node involvement (p = 0.017) and advanced clinical stage (p = 0.011). Conclusion: LC3, STAT3 and miRNA 101 may be valuable as biomarkers that may predict the poor prognosis of a cancer colon patient and the critical role of STAT3 and miRNAs in autophagy would expand our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of autophagy regulation. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis-institutional experience with pictorial review R. Pallavi * , N. Srikanth, T. M. Amruthesh, S. Sachin, K. Dinesh * Sakra World Hospital, Bangalore, India Objective: To study the varied clinical presentations of Eosinophilic gastroenteritis, a relatively rare inflammatory disease of unknown origin. Method: We retrospectively reviewed nine cases of Eosinophilic gastroenteritis diagnosed in our institution over a period of 2 years with correlation to radiological, endoscopic and histological features. Representative images will be presented. Results: Amongst the 9 cases, one presented with small bowel obstruction, one with diarrhoea, one with dyspepsia and six with abdominal pain. Eight cases were diagnosed on duodenal biopsies and once case on full thickness ileal biopsy. All the cases responded to steroids and no relapses were seen in any of the cases till date. CT scan was performed in six of the nine cases, four of which did not show any significant findings, one showed mild jejunal thickening and one showed features compatible sub-acute intestinal obstruction. Peripheral eosinophilia was noted only in two of the nine cases. Conclusion: Eosinophilic gastroenteritis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of unexplained abdominal pain. Correlation with high peripheral eosinophilic counts is helpful though not necessary in all cases. Timely treatment with steroids is curative. Objective: Xanthogranulomatous cholecystitis, an uncommon form of chronic cholecystitis, is considered to have an uncertain pathogenesis. It has been proposed that this condition appears due to rupture of Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses, with extravasation of bile or ulceration of gallbladder mucosa. Both of these conditions can easily be mistaken for malignancy, both clinically and histopathologically. Therefore, the presence of both lesions makes for a challenging diagnosis and it requires additional testing to exclude other conditions. Method: We report the case of a 40-year old woman who was clinically diagnosed with a pancreatic tumour and a cholecystectomy was performed. Results: We received one paraffin block requiring a consult. Microscopically, the gallbladder wall showed numerous round lipidladen macrophages and other types of inflammatory cells (neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes) . Adjacent to the liver bed, less than 1 mm in diameter, small ducts were found surrounded by a collar of connective tissue. Differential diagnosis considered a malignant process, so immunohistochemistry assays were performed and they showed an intense positive reaction for CK7, S100, SMA, a low Ki67 index and a negative reaction for MUC1. Conclusion: The purpose of this report is to outline the great difficulty that comes from differentiating benign from malignant processes and the importance of additional testing when confronted with a rare diagnosis. Cholelithiasis is well-established predisposing factor for the development of GB carcinoma.It is characterized by extracellular mucin comprising 50 % of the tumour volume. Tumours with less than 50 % stromal mucin were considered as adenocarcinoma with focal mucinous differentiation. When the mucinous component exceeds 90 %, the tumour is classified as pure mucinous/colloid carcinoma. We present a case of primary carcinoma of the GB as an unexpected histopathological finding in an elective cholecystectomy specimen. Method: A 67-year-old female underwent simple cholecystectomy because of cholelithiasis in our surgical clinic. There was a nodular mass measuring 4 × 4 × 2.5 cm in the corpus. The cut surface of the mass was tan to yellow, shiny, solid and firm. Results: Suprisingly,sections from the mass revealed a tumour composed of tumour cells floating in the pools of extracellular mucin,a signetringlike cells can be seen in clusters or lying individually within the mucin. The tumour was seen to infiltrate into the muscle layer. Displasia, intestinal metaplasia and calcification were also found. A diagnosis of incidental MAGB was made. Conclusion: MAGB exhibit important clinicopathologic differences from conventional GB carcinomas. Therefore a routine histopathological examination of all cholecystectomy specimens is a necessity. Histological type,grade and stage of the disease are the predictors of prognosis. Objective: Colon carcinoma, as one of the most common cancers, has been investigated for genetic alterations. Besides wellknown adenomacarcinoma sequence, it is recently found that BRAF mutation has an important role particularly in early stages of adenocarcinomas with serrated features. To the best of our knowledge, there isn't any study concerning BRAF mutational status of serrated polyps in Turkish population. In this study, we aimed to investigate the immunohistochemical expression profile of BRAF in colon polyps. Method: 49 sessile serrated and traditional adenomas, 10 hyperplastic polyps, 10 tubular adenomas, 10 aberrant crypt foci and 10 cases of normal controls were immunohistochemically evaluated for the presence of BRAF mutation with VE1 antibody. Results were statistically compared. Results: There was positive staining with VE1 antibody in 55.1 % of serrated adenoma cases, although 80 % of control groups and 70 % of aberran crypt foci were negative. Despite the hyperplastic polyps are regarded as members of the serrated polyp family, 90 % of these lesions showed no antibody expression. Conclusion: Our study results, in concordance with the recent literature suggest that serrated adenomas have BRAF mutation which may contribute in their malignant behavior. Objective: CD47 is a transmembrane receptor in the immunoglobulin superfamily. It interacts with signal-regulatory protein alpha (SIRPα) on the membrane of macrophage and neutrophils. There are some researches that CD47-SIRPα pathway worked as antiphagocytic "don't eat me" signal, and when the tumour expressed CD47 higher level, it could get ability to escape the innate immune system. The aim of this study is evaluation of CD47 expression in gastric cancer using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and mRNA in situ hybridization (mRNA ISH). Method: This study performed analysis of CD47 RNA expression status with RNAscope in a cohort of 55 surgically resected primary gastric cancers, using tissue microarray. RNAscope results were reported by manufacturer's scoring system. Protein expression was evaluated using commercial CD47 antibodies. Results: The proportion of cases with strong membranous expression in CD47 IHC was 1.8 % (1 out of 55). The proportion of cases with high cytoplasmic expression in CD47 IHC was 63.6 % (35 out of 55). Cytoplasm CD47 positive cases have tendency of poorly differentiated histology, lower lymph node metastasis, lower invasion, higher lymphoid stroma, lower tumour stage, microsatellite instable and better prognosis. Conclusion: We suggest that CD47 protein has some roles in gastric carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Objective: Histogenesis and progression of carcinosarcoma are still unknown. We report a case of carcinosarcoma of the stomach, with attention to its clonality, distribution of immunophenotypes and relationship between original and metastatic lesions. Method: [Case report] A 72-year-old woman with a history of appetite loss, anemia and weight loss, was admitted to our hospital. The patient underwent an esophagogastro-duodenoscopy that revealed a red-colored huge mass (13 × 13 × 6 cm) with erosion in the antral region of the stomach, and a distal gastrectomy sequentially. The metastatic tumour was detected in one regional lymph node. Results: Histologcal findings: The largest cross section was examined. The tumour, composed of 5 % carcinomatous and 95 % sarcomatous elements, were diffusely positive for p53 with a point mutation of TP53. The carcinomatous elements consisted mainly of well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma that was focally positive for HER2/neu and CD10, and partly of squamous cell carcinoma that was positive for p40 and/or p63. The sarcomatous elements, consisted mainly of spindle-shaped cells and partly of large cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, were largely positive for CD10 and partly positive for cytokeratin(AE1/AE3), desmin and myogenin. Regarding lymph node metastasis, the tumour also consisted of carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements, diffusely positive for p53 and CD10. Conclusion: Diffusely positive finding of p53 with a point mutation of TP53 indicates that this tumour is monoclonal, and CD10 expression may be related to lymph node metastasis in this case. Focal overexpression of HER2/neu suggests that HER2 alteration is a late event during progression of this tumour. Results: Of the studied cases ECS was appeared in 66 % of women and 34 % men. Most of all were high-grade adenocarcinoma-81 %, 19 %low-grade adenocarcinoma and Signet ring cell carcinoma. In 90 % of all cases the tumour does not grow into the submucosa (pT1a by TNM) and there were no cancerous emboli in the vessels. In 80 % of all cases ECS existed on the background of colonic metaplasia, in 86 % of all cases had dysplasia of varying severity. Genetic research revealed that 10 % of ECS detected KRAS p.G13D mutation (male, high-grade adenocarcinoma, pT1a). 100 % ECS was not detected BRAF mutations. Conclusion: Thus, ECS prevailed frequency in women (66 %), and histological type-high-grade adenocarcinoma (81 %) without germination stomach submucosa (90 %). In most cases, ECS occurred colonic metaplasia (80 %) and dysplasia (86 %). In 10 % of cases detected KRAS mutation, 100 % ECS was not detected BRAF mutations. Objective: Report of two cases of colorectal adenocarcinoma (CRC) arising in a background of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) both associated with well-differentiated morphology and serrated-like lesions in surrounding mucosa is presented. Method: Patient 1 (female, 44 years old) with ulcerative colitis for 15 years and was admitted for elective surgery for DALM lesions and colon ascendens stenosis. Patient 2 (female, 29 years old) presented with ileus and was diagnosed with IBD with concurrent stenosis of lienal flexure. Results: Patient 1: Resection specimen showed signs of ulcerative colitis with partial mucosal remission. Infiltration of colon ascendens with well differentiated adenocarcinoma was seen up to subserosal adipose tissue. Surrounding and distant mucosa showed several inflammatory pseudopolypous as well as serrated lesions. Patient 2: Resection specimen showed signs of Crohns disease, reported stenosis was due to well differentiated colorectal adenocarcinoma with partial mucinous differentiation infiltrating bowel wall to subserosa. Several foci of mucosal hyperplasia with serrated morphology was seen. There was no loss in immunohistochemical expression of mismatch repair proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) and BRAF V600E staining was negative in both cases. Conclusion: Patients with IBD has increased risk of CRC with precursor adenomatous DALM lesions. We are reporting two carcinomas showing bland and well differentiated morphology and serrated lesions. These two cases are pointing to an importance of reporting serrated lesions in IBD patients regarding their possible association to CRC via serrated pathway. Objective: Phlebosclerotic colitis is a fibrous degeneration ultimately leading to threadlike calcifications along colonic and mesenteric vessels and colonic wall thickening. Resulting mucosal ulceration causes expected symptoms of ischemic colitis: fever, abdominal pain, severe constipation, bowel obstruction, vomiting, diarrhea. Presentation of a 63 year old Caucasian woman: 1997 cervical carcinoma with radiation proctitis. No known intestinal disease. 2015 emergency hospitalization (rupture of an aneurysm of the pericallosal artery, ventricular hemorrhage). Four weeks into hospitalization, colon resection was performed due to rectal perforation and peritonitis. Method: CT scan, MRI, pathologic evaluation including immunohistochemistry. Results: No calcification was found by CT/ MRI. Gross Pathology of the resected colonic frame revealed confluent mucosal damage, and beginning transmural necroses reaching from the ascending colon to the rectum with perforation. Microscopy showed extensive and circumferential calcifications of the walls of medium sized, submucosal veins, not involving arteries or veins in the subserosal fat. No signs of viral, bacterial or fungal infection. Conclusion: This represents an unusual differential diagnosis of an ischemic colitis. Diagnosis was hampered by the unconsciousness due to the aneurysmal bleed. Colonic vascular calcifications suggest a socalled phlebosclerotic colitis, while histology shows unique features different from cases reported so far from Asia and Canada. Objective: We aimed to report the characteristics of lithiasis in septate gallbladder (SGB) occurring in adults. Septate gallbladder is a rare congenital abnormality defined by the presence of intercommunicating locules that may impact on bile streaming and stagnation. Method: A total of 62 surgically resected SGBs were analyzed for the main clinical and morphological features of the resected specimens. Relationships were analyzed by using the Kendall rank correlation test (Medcalc). Results: and, was supracentimetric (>1 cm) in 18 (34 %) cases. The gallbladder length varied between 3.5 and 12.7 cm. A body mass index (BMI) >25 was observed in 10 cases (8 cases: BMI >30). The presence of supracentimetric lithiasis correlated an increased gallbladder length and to BMI > 30 (p = 0.02/tau = 0.214 and p = 0.03/tau = 0.201, respectively). Conclusion: The results of our study suggest that supracentimetric lithiasis occurred in one third of the SGBs. The biological background of the correlation between an increased gallbladder length or obesity and supracentimetric lithiasis remains to be further studied. Results: Microscopic examination of the polyp revealed a moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with prominent clear cell change, which was invading the submucosa to Haggett's level 3. The tumour was positive for CDX2, focally positive for CK20 and negative for CK7. Alcian blue, PAS and PASD were negative. Two months later the patient underwent a sigmoid colectomy. A second polyp was found to be a tubulovillous adenoma with areas of clear cell change. There was no residual adenocarcinoma. Conclusion: Clear cell adenocarcinoma in the colon is usually a metastatic deposit from other organs. Most of the reported cases of primary colonic clear cell adenocarcinoma have occurred in men, in the left side of the colon. Nearly all formed part of a larger conventional adenoma. The prognosis of these tumours is currently unclear, and further studies will be required in order to improve our understanding of this condition. Objective: To illustrate an uncommon variant a gastrointestinal cancer affecting duodenal ampulla with little known experience as only 20 previous cases are reported in international literature. Diagnosis criteria and therapeutic approach can be useful to understand the nature and prognosis of these tumours. Method: Pancreaticoduodenectomy specimen (Whipple procedure) was studied from a 47-year-old female with a previous clinical report of abdominal pain, distension. A computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen showed an ill defined mass afecting pancreatic head and duodenal ampulla Results: Microscopic examination showed showed a neoplastic proliferation composed by sheets of signet ring cells without any glandular differentiation and with wide extension in duodenal mucosa and some extracellular mucin lakes. There was Infiltrative growth in the entire thickness of the bowel wall and pancreatic acini in a 2,5 cm global area. No metastases in regional lymph node were found. Conclusion: Signet ring cell carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater is a tumour with not well known origin and heterotopic gastric tissue has been postulated as the source of signet ring cells. Prognosis in cases described is closely related with stage and complete surgical resections. After a 6 month follow-up our patient remains free of disease. Objective: Investigation of the biomarkers that affect the pathogenesis and/or prognosis of gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are being carried out seriously. RacGAP1 (Rac guanosine triphosphatase-activating protein 1) is a protein that has crutial roles in cytokinesis, cell growth regulation, cell transformation and metastasis. It has recently been reported to participate in progression of various tumours, such as breast carcinoma. The aim of the study was to evaluate the clinicopathological significance of RacGAP1 on gastric GISTs for the first time in the literature. Method: RacGAP1 expression in 62 cases of gastric GISTs were analyzed immunohistochemically and correlated with the clinicopathological features [age, gender, risk group, mitotic count in 50 high power fields, tumour size, growth pattern, cellularity, nuclear pleomorphism, ulceration, hemorrhage, necrosis, tumour cell type], and Ki-67 labeling index, statistically. Results: RacGAP1 expression showed direct correlation with Ki-67 labeling index (p: 0.014), mitotic count (p: 0.036), high-risk groups according to both Fletcher's and Miettinen&Lasota's criteria (p: 0.032, p:0.022, respectively), epithelioid cell type (p: 0.038), and higher cellularity (p: 0.008). Conclusion: We suggest that overexpression of RacGAP1 is an indicator of adverse prognosis for gastric GISTs, and RacGAP1 might be used as an alternative marker instead of Ki-67 as a proliferation marker. Objective: Neoplasm with hepatoid features is a special type of cancer characterized by morphological features similar to hepatocellular carcinoma; It has been found in different organs such as the stomach, lung, pancreas,esophagus, papilla of vater, gallbladder, colon/rectum, kidney, urinary bladder, uterus, ovaries and peritoneum. Gastric Hepatoid AdenoCarcinoma (GHAC) have an incidence of 0,38-1 % among all gastric cancers. The diagnosis is based on recognition of characteristic histologic features. Method: A 54-year-old male patient with a history of squamous cell carcinoma in piriform sinus. Which presents DVT, inflammatory arthropathy 2 months of evolution, back pain radiated to lower limbs that prevents ambulation and unresponsive to analgesic treatment. It presents osteolytic lesion in left hip which is biopsied. The microscopic examination showed atypical poligonal neoplastic cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, prominent nuclei and high mitotic activity. Results: Immunohistochemical staining revealed positive for: CK7, CK8, CK19, CDX2, MUC2, MUC 5AC, Hepatocyte. And histochemical +: PAS, PAS-D. And negativity for: CK20, AFP, TTF1, S-100, CD 117, CD10, PSA. The diagnosis was compatible with GHAC. The patient died four days after diagnosis. Conclusion: -GHAC usually occurs in older people, although occasional early cases have been detected. -Clinically, a characteristic of these neoplasms is the extensive vascular infiltration, reflected in the high incidence of metastases (liver, lymph node). -GHAC is characterized by aggressive behavior and extremely poor prognosis compared with conventional gastric adenocarcinoma. -The majority of patients demonstrate an elevated serum AFP level, however 46 % of GHAC tissues were negatively stained with AFP. -Immunohistochemistry may help the differential diagnosis of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Objective: The etiology of granulomas in the GI tract is heterogeneous, making the differential diagnosis challenging. Method: We analized the cases of three young patients, a female and two males, who underwent ileocolic resection, with granulomas on the H&E slides. Results: In all the cases we identified areas of mucosa that were severely inflamed, ulcerated, covered by granulation tissue and exudate. In two cases the remaining mucosa had preserved architecture and granulomatous lesions with central necrosis. From these two cases, one had family history of tuberculosis that correlated with the confluent pattern of granulomas with central, amorphous, eosinophilic necrosis, favoring the diagnosis of intestinal tuberculosis, despite the negative Ziehl-Neelsen reaction. The other case with necrotizing granulomas presented suppurative intramural inflammation, also involving the lymph nodes, without chronic abnormalities. The most reliable diagnosis was infectious enterocolitis. Ziehl-Neelsen reaction was negative, while serology was positive for Salmonella typhimurium and Salmonella enteridis. Whereas, in the third case we observed architectural crypt distorsion, basal plasmacytosis and pyloric gland metaplasia. The inflammation was transmural, forming granulomas and nodular lymphoid hyperplasia. Muscularis mucosae and muscularis propria were hypertrophic, causing 'muscularization of submucosa'. Histological features favored the diagnosis of Crohn disease. Conclusion: When confronting with intestinal granulomatous inflammatory lesions it is very important to corelate the pathologic features with clinical history and endoscopic appearence. Objective: Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST) are the most common primary mesenchymal tumours of the gastrointestinal tract. Our objective was to correlate MDM2 immunohistochemical overexpression to clinicopathological features of GIST. Method: It was a retrospective study of 43 cases of GIST (2009 GIST ( -2012 . The diagnosis was based on CD117 immunohistochemical expression. MDM2 immunohistochemical staining was performed on archival paraffin-embedded and formol-fixed specimens. The risk assessement was based on mitotic and tumour size according to AFIP criteria. Results: The mean age was 55.11 ans. The stomach was the most affected site (51.2 %). Twenty five cases (61 %) had high risk tumours. The overall MDM2 expression was found in 68.4 % cases; high risk tumours stained mostly for MDM2 (78,6 %). Matastasis occured in 36 % of cases, with statistical correlation to MDM2 overexpression (p = 0,001), as much as the local agressiveness (p = 0,01). MDM2 was positive in 76.9 % among tumours >5 cm; positive in 64.3 % when mitosis >5/50HPF. Conclusion: MDM2 was mostly overexpressed in high grade GIST tumours, and was correlated to metastasis occurrence. Further studies are needed to confirm MDM2 as a marker of poor prognosis. Mucosal Schwann cell hamartoma of the Colon: Case report H. Akkaya * , M. Erbayrak * Baskent University Alanya Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Antalya, Turkey Objective: Mesenchmal colorectal polyps are uncommon lesions, particularly those of neurogenic origin. Mucosal Schwann cell hamartoma, newly proposed disease entity is a rare mesenchymal polyp that presents in intestine. Method: A 54 year old woman with lower abdominal pain and tenderness presented to gastroenterology clinic. She had no family history of familial adenomatous polyposis, multiple endocrine neoplasia type II or Cowden syndrome. Colonoscopy revealed a 2 mm polyp in descending colon and removed by forceps biopsy. There were no remarkable findings in terminal ileum and the other segments of colonic mucosa. Results: Histopathologically, H-E stained sections showed a polypoid fragment of colonic mucosa and mildly palisaded diffuse spindle cell proliferation with oval and elongated nuclei within the lamina propria. The lesion was poorly circumscribed and colonic crypt architecture was separated and distorted by the spindle cell proliferation and muscularis mucosa was not involved. The surface epithelium was intact without erosion or ulceration and there was no evidence of any dysplasia. The lesion had a benign cytologic appearance, no nuclear atypia, pleomorphism or mitosis. At immunohistochemistry all proliferated cells stained strongly with S100 protein and no immunoreactivity for smooth muscle actin, CD34 and CD117. Conclusion: It should be in mind in differential diagnosis of mesenchymal polypoid lesions in the colon. Results: The results showed little concordance across the three systems. The Kendall coefficient of concordance (KCC) agreement scores were: CAP: 2-poor, 2-fair; Evans-1-fair, 1-moderate, 2-good; MDA-1-poor, 2-moderate, 1-good. Using fibrosis in RG for the CAP system was a source of discrepancy. In the Evans system, quantifying tumour viability using artificial percentage cut-offs (ie. 9 vs 10 %,etc.) was fraught with difficulty. Although the MDA system generated greatest concordance, it is felt this was due to "oversimplification" surrounding arbitrary thresholds (</> than 5 % of tumour). Conclusion: It was felt that these systems lacked precision and clarity for accurate RG. However, presently the clinical utility and impact of histologic RG in patient management is questionable. There is a need to reevaluate RG in the pancreas and establish a reproducible, clinically relevant grading system. An asymptomatic small polypoid esophageal malignancy consisting of carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements: Possible early-stage lesion of esophageal carcinosarcoma T. Minamikawa * , Y. Shimizu, R. Tanaka, E. Konishi, A. Yanagisawa * Kyoto Okamoto Memorial Hospital, Dept. of Diagnostic Pathology, Japan Objective: We report a case of possible "early stage" esophageal carcinosarcoma. Method: A healthy asymptomatic male in his 40's visited our hospital for a medical checkup, and a gastroendoscopy revealed a small polyp at the esophagocardiac junction. Since endoscopic biopsy revealed growth of pleomorphic mesenchymal cells, we chose the esophagofundectomy for the method of treatment. Results: Pathology of the resected specimen revealed a pedunculated polyp (size: 6-mm), the top of which was covered with atypical squamous epithelium and underneath were the dissociative pleomorphic spindle cells. Immunohistochemically, only the epithelial element was positive for AE1/ AE3 and p40, whilst the spindle cells were positive for vimentin and negative for AE1/AE3 and p40. Both elements showed frequent labeling with p53 and Ki-67. HMB45 was negative in both elements. The malignant cell growth was restricted in a small area of the upper half of the polyp. The postoperative course has been uneventful as of the 12-month follow-up. Conclusion: The lesion in our case, despite its smaller size compared to those of esophageal carcinosarcoma reported so far, already comprised of carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements as evidenced by their immunephenotype. It is suggested that the two way differentiation occurs at quite an early stage. Objective: We report an interesting case of GIST involving an appendix with fibrous obliteration of the lumen. Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) of the appendix are a rare entity. Some studies have reported that the fibrous obliteration of the appendix can mimic an acute appendicitis. Method: An 43-year-old male presented to the emergency department complaining of lower abdominal pain for several days. He underwent laparoscopic appendectomy for acute appendicitis. For histopathological evaluation we used hematoxylin and eosin (H-E) staining. Five immunohistochemical staining antibodies were performed (vimentin, CD117, S100, CD34 and Ki67). Results: Macroscopic examination revealed an obliterated lumen of appendix and an irregular and asymmetrical thickening of the appendiceal wall. Histological examination show the lack of normal appendiceal mucosa and the lumen was displaced by a fibrous proliferation. In the subserosal layer we found a small nodule that consists densely packed cellular structure formed by spindle-shaped cells. These cells were positive for vimentin, CD117 (c-kit), CD34 and S100. The Ki-67 proliferation index of the tumour was 3 %. Conclusion: The tumour was diagnosed as very low risk GIST of vermiform appendix. Appendiceal GISTs can be associated with appendicitis symptoms. The expression of mesothelin associated with tumour aggressiveness in gastric adenocarcinoma S.-H. Han * , S. Park * Seoul National University, Bundang Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Seongnam, Republic of Korea Objective: In Korea, gastric cancer remains the most common cancer in men. The pleural metastasis with gastric cancer patients was associated with poor survival. Due to diversity of morphologic features, the immunohistochemical stains are performed to assist in the differential diagnosis. The objective of this study is to evaluate the expression of mesothelial markers and discuss their clinicopathological significance associated with patient's outcome. Objective: Present a series of cases of young patients with colorectal cancer that present a new onset malignancy not related to the primary tumour and describe its MLH1,MSH2, and BRAF mutations. Method: Data was collected retrospectively from the electronic database between years 2004-2014. Selection criteria were: colorectal carcinoma, <50 years and new onset malignancy not related to the primary tumour following the recommendations of the modified Bethesda guidelines. Immunohistochemistry staining was made for MLH1, MSH2, PMS2 and MSH6 using automatized equipment. BRAFV600 mutation analysis was made using a real-time PCR. Results: Initially 334 cases were retrieved, but only 18 were adequate for analysis. Mean age was 40.39 ± 7.28 years. The most common histopathological staging of their colorectal cancer was IIIB (38.8 %). New onset malignancies were located most frequently in colon (50 %) followed by endometrium, stomach, ovary, skin, adrenal gland, and pancreas. MLH1 was the most common molecular alteration (61.1 %) and all cases were negative to BRAFV600E mutation, which strongly suggest a Lynch syndrome. Conclusion: This is the first series of cases realized in the northern part of Mexico, which includes second neoplasms associated with Lynch syndrome. The absence of BRAF mutation in all cases opens a possibility for new studies to clarify the role of other molecular alterations in the pathogenesis of early-onset colorectal cancer. Understanding of these processes may lead to new treatments targeting specific molecular pathways. Objective: Amyloidosis of the colon is a rare disease presenting with non-specific symptoms, but can lead to life-threatening conditions. The purpose of the abstract is to describe the diagnostic and therapeutic behavior in a case of amyloidosis associated with multiple myeloma. Method: We present a patient with abundant hematochezia, anemia, polypoid lesions in the colon, diagnosed by fibro colonoscopy. Total colectomy was performed. The histological result shows amyloidosis and polyposis of the colon. Bone marrow puncture confirmed myeloma in the same patient. Results: Total colectomy was performed urgently due to massive hematochezia. Gastrointestinal passage is recovered through ileo-recto anastomosis with Stapler. The histological result shows AL amyloidosis with polyposis, associated with multiple myeloma. The therapy with melphalan and prednisolone was started following the NCCN guideline for treatment of amyloidosis. The patient was followed up for 1 year and is alive up to the moment. Conclusion: Surgical procedure should be contemplated only in an emergency setting (bleeding or perforation), as it is in our case because of the risk of decompensation of organs affected by amyloidosis. If a patient with hematochezia unresponsive to conservative treatment and polyposis, amyloidosis of colon should be considered. Knowledge of the disease provides timely standardized treatment. Results: The mean age was 66.0 years and the Male/Female sex ratio was 1.3. Fourteen patients (7.5 %) had two tumours within the resection; the more aggressive tumour was studied. Overall, 101 patients (54.0 %) had a right colon tumour, 12 (6.4 %) a transverse colon tumour and 74 (39.6 %) a left colon tumour. The mean size of tumours per location ranged from 4.8 to 5.0 cm. Most tumours were predominantly conventional adenocarcinomas (88.2 %), followed by mucinous adenocarcinomas (9.1 %), signet-ring cell carcinomas (1.6 %) and neuroendocrine carcinomas (1.1 %). Most cases of mucinous adenocarcinomas (64.7 %) and neuroendocrine carcinomas (100 %) were located in the right colon. Vascular, lymphatic or perineural invasion was found most frequently in neuroendocrine carcinomas (100 %) and signet-ring cell carcinomas (66.7 %), compared to conventional adenocarcinomas (31.5 %) and mucinous adenocarcinomas (17.6 %). Finally, most cases were stage II (39.6 %), followed by stage III (30.5 %), stage IV (21.9 %) and stage I (8.0 %). Conclusion: We can now confirm for the first time the similarity in the pathological characteristics of surgically removed colon cancer in Lebanon and other countries. Objective: Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in Turkey and in the world. Although surgery is curative for stage I, II and III A diseases, neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy has emerged as a standard care of locally advanced diseases. Pathologic response is considered a treatment effect. The objective of this study is to evaluate the clinicopathologic impact of mucin pools for the rectum cancer. Method: Totally 91 cases of rectal cancer were underwent surgery followed by neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy between 2010 and 2015. Eighty of 91 cases were re-evaluated by histopathologically for mucin pools. Results: The complete pathological response rate was 4,3 % (4 of 91). At a median follow up period of 43 months, 23 (25,2 %) had died of disease, 3 (3,2 %) had recurrence, 3 (3,2 %) had metastasis. Mucin pools were present in 28 specimens (30 %); 3 were acellular (3,2 %). Most often recurrent and metastatic diseases had subserosal mucin pools. Conclusion: This study suggested that deeply invasive mucin pools had poor outcome. The pathologic assessment is important to detect response of therapy. Especially specimen sampling and sections of tissue may cause to miss single tumour cells in the mucin pools. Objective: Intra-abdominal heterotopic ossification (IHO) is an uncommon, reactive condition where areas of metaplastic bone are seen in mesentery or peritoneum. In most cases it follows abdominal trauma. Mechanism of bone formation in soft tissue is not clear. Method: We present a case of 53 year old man with IHO diagnosed 5 years after partial colectomy, performed because of sigmoid carcinoma. The patient was admitted to the hospital with acute symptoms of bowel obstruction. During the operation part of small intestine was excised and sent for the histological examination. Results: Hematoxylin and eosin stained slides revealed the presence of multiple areas of heterotopic bone, granulation tissue with multinucleated giant cells and clusters of macrophages in mesentery. The diagnosis of IHO as a cause of bowel obstruction was rendered. Conclusion: Intra-abdominal heterotopic ossification is a very rare condition considered as a reactive process. In most cases IHO follows abdominal trauma. It may be asymptomatic or may lead to bowel obstruction. Surgical intervention is performed only in symptomatic cases. IHO ossification shows the tendency for recurrence but has no malignant potential. Prognosis for the patient is usually good, in rare cases morbidity is connected with bowel obstruction. Objective: Mastocytic colitis is a new entity, characterized by increased mucosal mast cells (more than 20 per high-power field) in the colon. There is no correlation with any type of mastocytosis. Some studies suggest that increased mast cells are present in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and diarrhea. The aim of our study was to determine the clinical, histological and immunohistochemical features of mastocytic colitis. Method: We present a case of mastocytic colitis, in a 72 years old male who had a 4-year history of chronic watery diarrhea. Results: A colonoscopy revealed grossly normal findings. Microscopically of random biopsies of the sigmoid colon showed non specific mild inflammatory edema in the lamina propria. A CD117 immunohistochemical stain was revealed more than 20 mast cells per high-power field. A finding consistent with the diagnosis of mastocytic colitis. Conclusion: The presence of mast cells was either missed due to lack of ability to see mast cells on biopsies, it may be useful to perform a CD 117 immunostain in patients with unexplained chronic diarrhea with normal colonic mucosa. Counting mast cells in gastrointestinal mucosal biopsies is becoming an increasingly common practice. Results: A total of 20 patients with histologically proven DT were included. The majority of patients were female (85 %) and the mean age at the time of diagnosis was 32. The average tumour size was 7.32 cm. Two groups were distinguished: The first represented 60 % of cases found mainly in women and localized to the abdominal wall, although well limited in radiological imaging, with a tendency to frequent recurrence. The second group represented 40 % of cases, intra-abdominal or at the expense of members. They were poorly limited in imaging with recurrence even after complete resection. Tumour cells expressed Vimentin intensely in all cases. CD34, C-kit and Ki67 were negative in all cases. Hormone receptors were positive in one case. Objective: Pigmentation of the gastric mucosa is a rare endoscopic and histologic finding and can be induced by different deposits: iron, calcium, barium sulphate, charcoal, melanin, lipofuscin and other. Method: We present the case of a 34-year-old female patient with ulcerlike dyspeptic syndrome and underwent BTD and proton pump inhibitors treatment. Because of persistent symptoms, gastroscopy with biopsies was performed three days later and BTD was discontinued. One month later, gastroscopy showed a normal mucosa. Results: The first gastroscopy revealed an extensive and diffuse inflammatory mucosa, with a friable and "solid plaque"-like aspect, raising the suspicion of a gastric lymphoma. The biopsies taken from the corpus and fundic region of the stomach showed a diffuse mild chronic gastritis, active, erosive, non-atrophic, negative for Helicobacter pylori, with mild hyalinosis of the lamina propria and the presence of diffuse amorphous black-brown pigment deposits located on the mucosal surface, within the exudate, within the foveolae and under the superficial regenerative epithelium. Perls stain was negative, excluding iron deposits. The second biopsies showed a normal mucosa, with no pigmentation. Conclusion: This case highlights the need for the differential diagnosis and shows the importance of communication between the gastroenterologist and pathologist. Bismuth is known to induce oral pigmentation (black tongue, a blue-black line along gingival margin and even mucosal esophageal necrosis when associated with salicylates).  Objective: The gallbladder is an unusual location for heterotopic pancreas (HP) which is defined as the presence of pancreatic tissue without any anatomic or vascular continuity with the main body of the pancreas.HP has been noted in the stomach (24-38 %), duodenum (9-36 %), jejunum (0.5-27 %), ileum (3-6 %) and Meckel's diverticulum (2-6.5 %), but has been rarely seen in the gallbladder. Method: We report a case of a 55-year-old female, complaining of biliary colic. The patient was hospitalized and a laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed for acute cholecystitis. On macroscopic examination, the gallbladder measured 10 cm in length and 3.5 cm in circumference, with a wall thickness from 0.3-0.5 cm.On cutting open, the mucosa was velvety flattened and a single yellow stone measuring 0.7 cm in diameter was found in the lumen of the gallbladder. In the neck region in the pericholecystic fat a firm, round, yellow nodule, measuring 1,2 cm in diameter was found. The tissue specimens were formalin fixed, paraffin embedded and stained with H&E. Results: On microscopic examination the nodule showed a wellcircumscribed ectopic pancreatic tissue composed of lobules of exocrine pancreatic acini, ducts without any connection to the gallblader lumen and no islet cells. The remaining sections had features of chronic cholecystitis with acute exacerbation. Conclusion: In our case the heterotopic pancreas has been classified as type 2 by von Heinrich classification. Objective: We aim to report a case of a desmoplastic small round cell tumour from the pelvic region that was thought to be a colorectal tumour. Method: A 41-year-old man came to the emergency room with rectal bleeding and abdominal cramping. During colonoscopy a rectal mass was found and biopsied. A CT scan showed multiple heterogeneous masses in the pelvic region, hepatic metastasis and abdominal and retroperitoneal adenopathies. Results: Rectal biopsy showed an infiltrating neoplasia composed of nests and trabeculae of small round cells, round nuclei with dispersed chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. Immunohistochemically, the cells were positive for cytokeratins 8/18 and 7, EMA, desmin (dot pattern), CD57, vimentin and NSE (moderate intensity) and negative for chromogranin A, synapthophysin, CD56, S100 protein, CDX-2 and PSA. There was cytoplasmatic glycogen. It was diagnosed as desmoplastic small round cell tumour. Conclusion: Desmoplastic small round cell tumour is a rare and highly aggressive tumour of undetermined histogenesis that caused the death of our patient 3 weeks after the diagnosis. In this specific case the diagnosis was challenging since it was histologically similar to a neuroendocrine tumour. Objective: Gallbladder schwannomas are extremely rare and usually discovered incidentally. We report on the case of a gallbladder schwannoma in 73 year old male patient with recurrent episodes of upper abdominal pain and jaundice. Method: The ultrasonography and CT scan revealed gallstones and thickening of the gallbladder wall. The patient underwent ERCP with gastric biopsy due to a suspicious lesion on the posterior wall. Under the diagnosis of early gastric cancer and cholecystolithiasis, gastrectomy and cholecystectomy were performed. On gross examination the gallbladder measured 4 x 3 cm with thickening of parts of the wall up to 0,7 cm. The mucosa was velvety, flattened, with six solid yellow stones present in the lumen. Formalin fixed, paraffin embedded tissue samples of the thickened parts were stained with HE and immunohistochemically with monoclonal antibodies against S-100, CD-56, CD-57, Ki 67 and CK19. Results: Microscopic examination revealed a tumour mainly consisted of spindle shaped cells (Antoni A), admixed with extremely rare Antoni B cells. Neither atypical cells, nor signs of malignancy were found. Immunohistochemically the cells were positive for S-100, CD-56 with Ki67 < 2 %. Conclusion: Gallbladder is unusual and extremely rare localization for schwannomas, therefore immunohistochemistry is a necessary tool for definite diagnosis. Objective: Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) are mesenchymal neoplasms occurring mainly in the gastrointestinal tract. Tumour size, mitotic rate and location are the main prognostic features. We present two unusual cases, one presenting as a gastric cyst, and the other localized in the head of the pancreas. Method: Case1: 69-year-old female was admitted with upper abdominal pain and a palpable epigastric lump. Ultrasonography and CT revealed a cystic mass with 58 × 58 × 61 mm. She underwent atypical gastrectomy. Case2: 67-year-old female presented with upper abdominal pain. CT revealed a pancreatic mass with 50 × 38 mm and was submitted to cephalic duodenopancreatectomy. Results: Case1: Macroscopic examination revealed a well circumscribed, cystic lesion with 7 cm, with an irregular inner surface. Histology revealed an epithelioid neoplasm with 2mitosis/15 mm2. Case2: Grossly, revealed an intrapancreatic, well circumscribed, whitish, solid tumour with 55 × 40 × 35 mm. Histology revealed a predominant fusiform neoplasm with 2mitosis/15 mm2. Both cases were positive for DOG-1 and CD34. Conclusion: Literature suggests that in cystic GISTs, tumour size is not a true indicator of aggressiveness. The larger the cystic component, the lower the objectivity in determining tumour size. Extra-GISTs, especially pancreatic origin, are very rare thus its biological behavior is unknown. More cases and long-term follow-up studies are needed to predict the outcome of unusual GISTs. Objective: The extranodal extension (ENE) of nodal metastases, i.e. the extension of neoplastic cells through the nodal capsule into the perinodal soft tissue, is a histological feature that has recently been considered an important prognostic factor in various types of tumour. It has yet to be taken into account by the TNM staging system for upper gastro-intestinal cancer, however. Method: To provide a complete evaluation of the prognostic role of ENE in such neoplasms, a systematic review and a meta-analysis were conducted. Comparing patients with ENE (ENE+) vs. intra-nodal extension (ENE-), we summarized the data using risk ratios (RR) for the number of deaths/recurrences, and hazard ratios (HR) with 95 % confidence intervals (CI), adjusted for potential confounders, for the time-dependent risk related to ENE positivity. Results: The presence of ENE was associated with a significantly higher risk of all-cause mortality (relative risk and hazard ratio both statistically significant), cancer-specific mortality (relative risk and hazard ratio both statistically significant), and disease recurrence (relative risk and hazard ratio both statistically significant). Conclusion: For upper gastro-intestinal cancers, our results indicate that ENE should be considered for prognostic purposes from the gross sampling to the pathology report, and also by future oncologic staging systems. Objective: To asses the pathologic tumour response (PTR) in patients with colorectal carcinoma (CRC) with synchronous liver metastases treated with an inverse strategy of chemotherapy first followed by surgery resection and correlates both with chemotherapeutic agents. Method: Forty-two patients were included. Chemotherapeutic agents were classified into: Cytostatic agents (CA), combination with monoclonal antibody against the epithelial growth factor (anti-EGFR) or with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). PTR was assessed using a four grade score based on residual tumour cells. Results: Twelve patients showed PTR more than 50 % in both liver and intestine. Liver PTR was greater with the association of CA+VEGF (median 95 %) followed by CA+anti-EGFR and CA. In the primary was greater with CA anti-EGFR (median 55 %), followed by CA and CA+ VGEF. No response or poor tumour response was significantly more frequent in primary tumours than metastases. Liver chemotherapy with CA causes more fibrosis as a form or regression (median 65 %) than other associations and CA+VEGF more necrosis. Conclusion: PTR is greater in liver metastases than in primary tumours and increases when CA is associated with anti-EGFR. In primary tumours all chemotherapeutic agents produce fibrosis as the main form of regression and in the liver by CA. Objective: Although extremely rare, neoplasms with overlapping histological and immunohistochemical features to gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GISTs) may occur outside the gastrointestinal tract (extra GISTs -EGISTs). Method: A 64-year-old female was admitted to the hospital for myalgia and diffuse abdominal back pain present for several months. The abdominal CT scan revealed a sparsely delimitated, heterogenous, solid, tumour mass in the right paravetebral region. Consecutively, surgery was indicated. Results: Macroscopical examination revealed a nodular, encapsulated, yellow-whitish, elastic tumour, measuring 7 × 6 × 5 cm. On light microscopy, the tumour was infiltrating the surrounding connective capsula, extending into the adjacent skeletal muscles. The tumour was composed of large, pleomorphic spindle cells, arranged in a storifom or fascicular pattern, with a high mitotic index (40mitoses/50HPF). Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for CD117, CD34, Vimentin, and negativity for S100, SMA, CD99. Morphological and immunohistochemical features leaded to a diagnosis of EGIST (intermediate risk form). Conclusion: We herein report a rare, challenging case of primary EGISTs of the retroperitoneum. This diagnosis should be considered when imaging studies reveal an abdominal, retroperitoneal mass, without connection to the gastrointestinal tract. The pathogenesis, prognosis and optimal treatment of these tumours are not yet fully elucidated. In absence of these data, an accurate follow-up is recommended. Objective: Solid primary mesenterial tumours are characterised by low incidence (1:200,000-1:350,000) and predominance of lipomas. Our objective is to present a rare tumour-primary mesenterial leiomyosarcoma. Method: Medical documentation, pathology/immunohistochemistry (IHC) slides and radiologic investigations were reviewed in the context of up-to-date scientific literature. Results: A 47-year-old woman complained of mild right upper abdominal pain. The computed tomography disclosed multiple liver metastases from cancer of unknown primary location. Liver biopsy showed loose bundles of spindled cells exhibiting nuclear polymorphism and atypical mitoses. High-grade sarcoma was evident, suggesting differential diagnosis of gastrointestinal stromal tumour or malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour, among others. On exploratory laparoscopy, a neoplasm (5.5 × 5 × 4.3 cm) was found in mesentery below lig. Treitzi next to a.mesenterica superior. The mass was excised simultaneously with liver metastasis. Microscopically, tumour was composed of disarrayed spindle cell bundles in hypocellular myxoid stroma with hyalinosis. There were 21 mitoses/10 high-power fields. IHC was positive for actin and desmin, but negative for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, CD34, CD117. The proliferation fraction (Ki-67) was 72.0 %. No other masses were found elsewhere, including stomach, intestines or uterus. Thus, high-grade mesenteric leiomyosarcoma with hepatic metastases was diagnosed. Conclusion: Here we show a well-documented primary mesenterial leiomyosarcoma: highly unusual cause of metastatic liver lesion. E-PS-06-068 Gastritis Cystica Profunda mimetizing gastric GIST C. Quadros * , I. Alves, C. Ferreira * Hospital de Santa Maria, Anatomia Patológica, Lisboa, Portugal Objective: Gastritis cystica profunda is a rare polypoid lesion characterized by the presence of dilated cystic glands in the submucosa and even muscularis propria, usually presenting at gastroenterostomy stomal sites. We report this entity in a patient without history of previous surgeries. Method: A 67 year old woman who underwent an atypical gastric resection due to a clinical diagnosis of gastric GIST. Results: Macroscopically, a polypoid lesion with a nodular surface and a central ulcer was observed, with multiple cysts and solid areas on crosssection. Histologically, the gastric mucosa showed focal lesions of chronic atrophic gastritis with activity, hemorrhage and ulceration, whereas the submucosa and muscularis propria displayed an abundant cystically dilated pyloric-type and foveolar-type glandular proliferation, without mitoses or atypia; surrounding the glands there was a thin layer of lamina propria and fibromuscular hyperplasia. The diagnosis of Gastritis cystica profunda was made. Conclusion: Gastritis cystica profunda must be differentiated from gastric well-differentiated adenocarcinoma and pancreatic heterotopia. Since pancreatic ducts were not observed, there was no desmoplasia and the glands had a benign morphology, without atypia, these entities were excluded. Even though it is a benign lesion it can be associated with dysplasia and stump carcinoma, thus follow-up is advised. Objective: HDGC is a form of gastric cancer familial aggregation, characteristically with increase lifetime risk of developing diffuse gastric cancer (DGC) and lobular breast cancer (LBC). Germline mutations in the CDH1 gene is detected in 30 % a 40 % of cases (WHO). Our aim is to study the clinico-pathological features of HGDC with the help of 3 CDH1 mutation carriers that met the clinical criteria of HGDC as well as review of the literature and recommended guidelines. Method: Gastric biopsies (Cambridge Protocol) and one surgical specimen, from 3 CDH1 mutation carriers, were examined thoroughly and put in perspective with clinical context and previous studies. Results: No lesions were found in endoscopy/macroscopic examination. However, histology showed tiny intramucosal foci of DGC in 1/25 and 3/38 fragments from the biopsies of each patient and in a few slides from the gastrectomy. The absence of atrophic gastritis or intestinal metaplasia was noted. Conclusion: Our results emphasize recommendation of extensive sampling and careful evaluation of the lesions by a pathologist with experience in this pathology. HGDC patients are advised endoscopic surveillance and/or prophylactic total gastrectomy. These options are highly individualised. E-PS-06-070 Two synchronous adenocarcinoma of large intestine, both colliding with ovarian serous carcinoma P. A. Rizea * , D. Crisan, C. Lazar * Cluj Napoca, Romania Objective: Synchronous or collision tumours of colon are rare, but two synchronous adenocarcinoma, both colliding with an ovarian carcinoma, are exceedingly rare. Method: A 67-year-old woman with 4-month history of constipation and weight loss was diagnosed with rectal cancer infiltrating the uterus, with peritoneal carcinomatosis. Rectosigmoidectomy with total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed and the specimen was submitted to the department of pathology. Results: Gross examination of the intestine revealed two cancers, separated by a distance of 11 cm, apparently both infiltrating the peritoneal surface. Ovaries were enlarged, white nodular and firm. There were numerous white firm nodules on the peritoneal surface, of 0,5-3 cm in size, and the omentum was transformed into a white, solid mass. Microscopically, both colon tumours were well differentiated adenocarcinoma invading subserosal tissue. Tumours in ovaries, as well as all the nodules on the peritoneum and omentum, were diagnosed as serous ovarian carcinoma, confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Both colon adenocarcinomas were colliding with metastases from the ovarian serous carcinoma, which infiltrated from the surface of peritoneum into the muscularis propria, without admixture at their interface (confirmed with CK7 and CK20 stainings). All the lymph nodes metastases were of serous carcinoma. Conclusion: Even our patient had two colon adenocarcinomas, the most aggressive was the ovarian serous carcinoma. Objective: Individuals with a body mass index (BMI) ≥40 kg/m2 are defined as class III obese. Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (LSG) is a commonly used surgical method for weight loss in these patients. Method: Histopathological findings in LSG specimens of 129 consecutive class III obese patients were re-evaluated. Results: Ninety-four patients (73 %) were female. Mean age was 37,43 (range 17-65 years). Their BMI differed between 40 and 62 kg/m2. The vast majority of the cases had chronic gastritis (97 %), with active inflammation in nearly one third (29 %). Helicobacter Pylori (HP) associated gastritis with nodular lymphoid hyperplasia (NLH) was seen in 63,5 %. Notably, NLH without evidence of HP was detected in almost one quarter (n = 31; 24 %). Twenty-three percent had mucosal changes due to proton pump inhibitors. None had gastric dysplasia, however regenerative mucosal changes were seen in 30 %. Intestinal metaplasia and atrophy were rarely detected (6 %). Prior endoscopy was performed in only 4 patients (3,1 %). No significant association was found between BMI and presence and/or severity of gastritis. Conclusion: A wide spectrum of histopathological findings has been reported in LSGs, as gastritis being the most common finding. We also found a higher prevalence of HP, compared to previous reports, suggesting that HP eradication may be necessary in majority of patients undergoing LSG. Objective: Gastric carcinoma is a common cancer type and serious cause of death. In this study, we have investigated in clinical prognostic effect of DEK expression in gastric cancer and the correlation between survival and expression rate. Method: A total of 34 cases of gastric cancer patients who underwent surgery in our hospital, between 2010 and 2015 were selected for this study. Immunhistochemistry for DEK was performed on paraffin embedded tumour tissues. A nuclear staining in tumour cells was considered to be positive for DEK. The percentage of cells expressing DEK scored as <25 %, 25-50 %, >50 %. Staining intensity was recorded as weak or moderate/ strong. High level DEK expression was defined as a moderate/ strong staining in at least 25 % of tumour cells. Low level DEK expression was defined as positive nuclear staining with weak intensity. Results: The patients age varies between 7 and 77, male female ratio was approximately 2.14 of the cases were tubular adenocarcinoma, 20 of the cases were poorly cohesive carcinoma according to WHO 2010 classification. 23 of the cases were identified as high level, 11 of the cases showed low level DEK expression. Half of the low level stained cases lived more than 24 months, on the other hand 22 of the 24 cases which was categorized as high level staining lived far less than 24 months. This findings was statistically significant. Conclusion: Increased expression of human DEK proto-oncogen has been associated with numerous malignancies. High level DEK expression is though to be associated with poor prognosis, and low survival rate. Further research is needed to determinate prognostic value of this proto-oncogene expression in gastric carcinoma. Objective: Adenocarcinoma (ADC) of the anal canal is a rare disease comprising only 5 % of all anorectal neoplasias and 1.5 % of all gastrointestinal tumours. We report 2 new cases of this rare neoplasm with long proctologic medical history but with two different outcomes. Method: We identified in our database two cases of ADC of the anal canal diagnosed in 2 women. Results: The first patient was a 71 year old woman followed for more than 10 years for hemorrhoids and anal prolapsed treated medically. After, physical examination found a 3 cm bulging mass 1 cm from the anal verge. The biopsies concluded to a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma expressing CK7 and CK20. The second patient was a 62 year old female patient, with a long medical history of anal fistula treated many times with surgery but no anatomopathology exam were made. A bulging mass of the anal canal was discovered in physical examination measuring 4 cm with 3 anal fistula. The patient had neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by surgery. The anatomopathology concluded to a mucinous adenocarcinoma of the anal glands CK7-and CK20+. The follow up of the patient showed no sign of recurrence. Conclusion: The pathogeny is still unknown. Symptomatology has no specificity and the diagnosis is often late, in an advanced stage of the sickness. Recurrent or non recurrent fistula-in-ano requires multiple biopsies for pathology analysis in order to screen a related cancer. Tumour dimension, lymph node involvement, histologic grade and treatment modality are independent prognosis factors for survival. Early suspicion is crucial to avoid delayed diagnosis and treatment. Objective: Endometriosis is a rather frequent condition of fertile women, and often cause of sterility and chronic pelvic pain. Endometriosis is gonadal or extragonadal, the last, seldom occurs in the intestinal wall. Intestinal foci cause diarrhea or constipation through impaired peristalsis and obstruction. Method: Our patient is a 44 years old woman with a few months alteration of constipation and diarrhea. She was admitted for subocclusive syndrome, mild inflammatory syndrome with normal fecal calprotectin, mild anemia and hypoalbuminemia. Colonoscopy describes an incomplete stenosis in lower sigmoid, suggestive of Crohn's disease, while abdominal tomography reveales a diffuse thickening of the sigmoid wall. Laparotomy found an intramural tumour adherent to the left ureter. Results: Intramural colonic endometriosis infiltrating subserosa, muscularis propria and submucosa with areas of hemorrhage was diagnosed extemporaneously, and confirmed on paraffin embedded tissue with immunohistochemistry and special stains. Postoperative evolution was favorable. Conclusion: Endometriosis may evolve aggressively, extending in muscularis propria along the nerve plexi, and in lymph nodes. It can have a pseudo-acute presentation with intestinal obstruction or severe diarrhea and may be confused with inflammatory bowel disease or intestinal tumours. Objective: Sleeve gastrectomy (SG) is a bariatric surgical procedure used in morbid obesity. In this study, histopathologic changes in the SG specimens of obese Turkish patients have been characterized. Method: 50 SG cases re-evaluated using H&E, PAS-Alcian Blue and Modified Giemsa staining. For cases with gastritis, Sydney classification was used. Location and distribution of lymphoid aggregates/follicles in the gastric mucosa noted. Results: Average age was 38 year with a female to male ratio of 6:1. BMI ranged from 40 to 65 kg/m 2 . 37 cases (68 %) had chronic active gastritis, 11 cases (22 %) had chronic inactive gastritis and 4 cases (4 %) had normal histology. Presence of H. pylori was detected in 34 cases (68 %). In almost all cases (98 %), lymphoid aggregates/follicles were present. Lymphoid tissue extended from muscularis mucosae to the lumen, filling the entire mucosa, in 27 cases (54 %). Intestinal metaplasia, cystic dilatation of mucosal glands due to PPI usage, and hyperplastic polyps were other changes. No statistically relevant relationship was found between histopathologic changes and patient parameters. Conclusion: Histopathologic changes seen in Turkish SG cases have not been previously studied. Compared to other SG studies in the literature, there was a higher rate of chronic gastritis and H. pylori in our cases. Objective: The aim of this study is to evaluate the concordance in diagnosis of gastric epithelial neoplasia among pathologists with different levels of experience. Method: The study included gastric biopsies from 32 cases from different Institutes (Medical Faculties and Training and research hospitals) in Istanbul. They were diagnosed with spectrum from normal to invasive carcinoma. All biopsies were renanalysed according to Vienna Classification blindly by 29 pathologists who were working different Institutes with different experience level in GIS. Intraclass Correlation Coefficient and kappa analyses were applied for agreement among observers. Results: Distribution of the initial diagnosis of the biopsises: Negative for Displasia :2; Indefinite for neoplasia: 4; Low grade displasia: 5; High grade displasia: 11; invasive neoplasia: 10. Overall agreement was high (96,5 %; p:0.000). Pathologists were two grouped as more than 15 year and less than 15 year of experience. Agreement was relatively lower in less experienced group. Lowest agrement was in cases with¨Indefinite for displasia¨. The concordance was high in invasive carcinoma cases in both pathologist group. Conclusion: In diagnosis of gastric epithelial neoplasias, the interobserver agreement is depended on the experience of pathologist especially on Gastrointestinal system pathology. Diagnosis of Indefinite for displasia is still problem even in experienced pathologists. Objective: Colorectal cancer is the third most common malignant neoplasm worldwide. PRL-3 (phosphatase of regenerating liver-3/PTP4A3) was reported play a role in the progression of colorectal cancer. However, how the mechanisms of PRL-3 induce progression and metastatic ability, interact with others molecule such as MMP2 and E-Cadherin, remain largely unknown. To clarify the molecular proteins that involved in colorectal cancer development and progression, we investigate the expression of PRL-3, MMP2 and E-Cadherin in colorectal cancer and correlate the expression with the clinicopathologic parameters. Method: Expression of PRL-3, MMP2 and E-Cadherin in 76 colorectal cancer specimens were examined by immunohistochemistry. Results: Among colorectal cancer specimens examined, there were 30 (39.5 %) well differentiated, 36 (47.4 %) moderately differentiated and 10 (13.2 %) poorly differentiated CRC. There were a significant correlation between histological grading and PRL-3 (p = 0.044), MMP2 (p = 0.040) and E-cadherin expression (p = 0.039), respectively. The expression of PRL-3 was significantly correlated with the expression of MMP2 (p < 0.001) and the expression of E-cadherin in colorectal cancer (p = 0.003). The result showed that more frequent expression of PRL-3, the higher expression of MMP2 and the lower expression of E-cadherin in colorectal cancer. Conclusion: These study strongly suggest that PRL-3 may play a role to up regulated expression of PRL-3 and down regulate the expression of Ecadherin in the development and progression of colorectal cancer. PRL-3 and MMP2 might be a novel molecular marker for aggressive colorectal cancer. Objective: Small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (SC-NEC) is a rare type of colon neoplasm with an incidence of only 0,6 %. It is associated with a poor prognosis and usualy with distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis Method: In this report we present the case of a 41 year-old man who underwent an abdominal computed tomography and a gastrointestinal endoscopy in our institution which revealed a large tumour located in the right colon. A right hemicolectomy was performed and a large 6 cm tumour was identified in the cecum. Results: Histologically the tumour was composed with small to medium neoplastic cells arranged into irregular sheets consisted with small cell NEC. Immunohistochemistry exam was performed using eight biomarkers and a positive reaction was identifed for Synapthophisin, NSE, CD56, CDX2 and AE1/AE3. A negative imunostain was noted for Chromogranin A, TTF1 and CEA. Also it was observed a high Ki67 index prooving the high malignancy of this tumour. The most frequent molecular abnormalities identified are those involving MEN1, p53 and CDKN2/Rb genes. Conclusion: Small cell NEC is a rare diagnose in which histologic, immunophenotype and molecular features can help in understanding the biological behaviour of this type of neoplasm Objective: Coexistence of colonic carcinoma with tuberculosis is an extremely rare condition. Here we describe the case showing association of colonic adenocarcinoma with colonic tuberculosis in the course of generalized tuberculosis. Method: An 83-year-old female was subjected to autopsy at Institute of Pathology, University of Belgrade -Faculty of Medicine, with a clinical diagnosis of severe sideropenic anemia. Results: External examination revealed pronounced cachexia and pale skin. Numerous small whitish nodules were spread within the lungs, pleura and liver. Microscopic analysis confirmed that they corresponded to generalized tuberculosis. Examination of the colon showed an ulcerated nodular mass (6 × 5 × 3 cm) in the caecum. Histopathological evaluation demonstrated well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the caecum where carcinomatous tissue was intermingled with tuberculous granulomas containing caseous necrosis, epitheloid cells and Langhans giant cells. No sarcoid-like granulomas and reactive lymphoid follicles, characteristic for Crohn disease, were seen in any segment of the colon. In liver, the tuberculous granulomas were associated with colonic metastases. Conclusion: Clinically undiagnosed adenocarcinoma of the caecum was closely associated with tuberculosis of the same site in the course of clinically unrecognized generalized tuberculosis. It is essential to record such cases in order to clarify the potential causal relationship between the carcinoma and tuberculosis. Objective: To study p53 mutation status in gastric patients of Karachi, Pakistan. Method: Total 77 formalin fixed Paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissues were collected from gastric cancer patients. Followed by DNA extraction. Extraction of DNA was confirmed by amplifying a fragment of internal β-globin gene. Exon 5, 6 and 7 were amplified by primer specific PCR. Furthermore single stranded conformational polymorphism was performed on 12 % polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Mobility shift was observed by Silver staining the Gels. Results: PCR-SSCP analysis of p53 exons 5-7 revealed by band mobility shift indicative of mutation in 39 (50.6 %) from 77 FFPE of gastric cancer patient samples. Fourteen mutations were found in exon 5, six in exon 7 and nine mutations in exon 7. One sample sequence mutated in both exons 5 and 6. One sample sequence mutated in both exons 6 and 7. Three samples have mutated sequence in both exons 5 and 7. To confirm the presence of mutation, 29 cases in which aberrantly migrating bands were observed by SSCP were sequenced. Conclusion: Results outcome support the statement that cancer progression might be facilitate by mutation in various exon of p53 tumour suppressorgene. Abdominal cocoon syndrome: An unusual pathologic finding M. Martínez López * , M. Blanco Bellas, S. Álvarez Díaz, C. Ibarrola de Andrés from tropical/subtropical regions. It may cause acute or sub-acute intestinal obstruction and it's usually diagnosed during surgery. Method: We describe a 58-year-old male patient presenting with small bowel obstruction without relevant surgical or medical history. CT of the abdomen revealed collapsed loops of small bowel. Laparotomy was performed, with a resection of jejunum-ileum of 45 cm. Results: Grossly, the surgical specimen revealed membranous adhesions enclosing the intestinal loops in a concertina-like fashion, giving a cauliflower-like appearance (figure 1). Histological examination revealed formation of thin sheets of dense fibrocollagenous tissue and focal fat necrosis with xanthomatous histiocytes (figure 2). No other type of inflammatory reaction was observed. The intestinal wall didn't show any pathology. Conclusion: Abdominal cocoon syndrome is a rare pathology and is difficult to diagnose. Several mechanisms in secondary forms include chronic peritoneal dialysis and less frequently prior abdominal surgery, several infections, beta-blocker treatment or chemotherapy. However, in some cases as in ours, the etiology remains obscure. A high index of clinical suspicion and recognition of a radiological findings should be considered in order to ensure proper management. Extremely rare case of synchronous gastric and colonic metastases occurring 9 years after an uterine leiomyosarcoma N. Puie * , L. P. Trica, I. Rusu, G. A. Nagy, R. Bodea, C. Georgiu * UMF Cluj-Napoca, Pathology, Romania Objective: Uterine leiomyosarcoma (ULMS) is a rare tumour, representing 1-2 % of uterine malignancies. It is highly aggressive, has poor prognosis, a 5-year survival rate of 40 % and high metastatic rate, especially in lungs. Method: A 58-year-old woman who had undergone hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy and radiochemotherapy for ULMS 9 years ago presented with gastrointestinal bleeding. Gastroscopy showed two tumoural masses, while colonoscopy identified two pedunculated polyps on the descending colon. CT revealed abdominal and pelvic lymphadenopathy. Total gastrectomy and polypectomy were performed. Results: Histologically, both sites revealed proliferations of spindle cells with whorled pattern, nuclear atypia, 5 to 8 mitotic figures/10HPF and additional necrosis in the gastric tumours. Immunohistochemistry was negative for CD117, DOG1, S100, CD34 and positive for SMA, ER, PR. 20 % of nuclei stained positive for Ki67. Considering the patient's history and the immunohistochemical profile, we diagnosed the lesions as gastric and colonic metastases of ULMS. Conclusion: Regardless of the primary tumour, colonic metastases are exceptionally rare. The peculiarity of the case stands in both an extended disease-free survival and the gastrointestinal involvement. The gross appearance is similar to other types of polyps. As the experience is limited, multidisciplinary approach and long-term follow-up in managing such patients may be the best available option. Objective: We aimed to further define the characteristic features of tumour deposits (TD) with perpendicular sections. Method: Thirty paraffin blocks representing 47 TD of 15 colorectal carcinomas were selected. A median of 4(2-10) perpendicular sections of 2-3 mm-thickness were made and embedded on their cut surface. Sections were evaluated for the clues of lymph node (LN) structures (presence of capsule, capsular sinus or lymphoid tissue). Results: Of 47 TD, 18(38 %) had a round shape with a thick capsule-like fibrosis, 10(21 %) were encapsulated with irregular infiltration, and 19(40 %) had irregular borders without a capsule. We highly suspected of lymph node in 6/18 tumour deposits with round shape and thick capsule-like fibrosis due to the presence of minimal lymphoid tissue. After examination of additional perpendicular sections, a more organized lymphoid tissue (4), subcapsular sinus (1) and involvement of efferent lymphatics and subcapsular sinus (1) led a call for LN in 6 cases. In the rest 41 cases, additional perpendicular sections were unable to reveal any feature suggestive of LN, except one case. Overall, 7/47(15 %) TD were reclassified as metastatic LN. Conclusion: In the majority of the cases, a more detailed examination of TD with perpendicular sections was unable to uncover any relevant feature suggestive of a metastatic LN. Objective: To report a challenging case of an esophageal polyp. Method: Slides were colored with hematoxylin and eosin. Immunohistochemistry using a large panel of antibodies was performed. Results: A previously operated 63-year old patient for colonic adenocarcinoma presented with an esophageal polyp. On histological examination, esophageal mucosa was ulcerated with many atypical, large, discohesive cells in the lamina propria (Panel a). Nuclei were pleomorphic, sometimes multiple, with prominent eosinophilic nucleoli (Panel b, arrow). They were intermingled with many granulocytes and plump vessels, in a backround of granulation tissue. Immunohistochemical study showed only positivity with vimentin (Panel c). All the other markers were negative (pan-cytokeratin, CK7, CK20, EMA, S-100, CLA, HMB45, CD31, FactXIII a, AML, CD-1a, CMV). Ki67 showed a low proliferative index. The diagnosis made was that of a benign bizarre stromal cell polyp of the esophagus. The patient is free of disease 6 months later. Conclusion: History of colonic adenocarcinoma made the diagnosis of this stromal bizarre polyp difficult and the main differential diagnosis was metastases, ruled out with immunohistochemistry. Objective: To evaluate the role and significance of Her 2neu as biomarker in premalignant and malignant lesions of uterine cervix, and to correlate its expression with stage and grade of cervical cancer. Method: This 3 year study included all the cases diagnosed as premalignant, carcinoma-in-situ, and invasive carcinoma on cervical biopsies. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for Her 2neu was done using Biogenex, Clone CB11 antibody, and results were scored according to Wolff etal 2007. Her 2neu IHC scores were correlated with the clinicopathological parameters namely grade, stage and histological type of the lesions. Statistical analysis was done using SPSS software (v.16.0). Results: Higher Her 2neu score correlated positively with the grade and stage of premalignant and malignant cervical lesions. Higher score was seen in malignant cases with positive lymph node status. Although -Thursday, 29 September 2016 .3 E-PS-07 Gynaecological Pathology adenocarcinoma showed a higher score than squamous cell carcinoma, the difference was not statistically significant. Conclusion: Her 2neu expression evaluation may provide additional and independent prognostic information in the clinical course of cervical cancer; and it could be a potential therapeutic target in cervical cancer treatment. E-PS-07-002 Endometrial carcinoma and its precursor lesions: One-year experience in one center Objective: Endometrial carcinoma is the 4th most common malignancy of the female reproductive system in Romania which is currently recording an increasing trend worldwide as well as in our country. Endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia (EIN) or atypical hyperplasia is the immediate precursor lesion in endometrial carcinoma which can be detected in endometrial biopsies performed due to abnormal vaginal bleeding. Method: This is a retrospective analysis performed in the Department of Pathology of the University Emergency Hospital Bucharest, Romania over a period of 1 year (January 2015-January 2016) which involved a total of 264 cases of female patients with endometrial carcinoma and hyperplastic precursor lesions. We investigated 183 cases of nonatypical hyperplasia, 26 cases of atypical hyperplasia (EIN), 46 cases of endometrioid carcinoma, 5 cases of clear cell carcinoma, 3 cases of serous carcinoma and 1 case of mucinous carcinoma. Results: The most notable finding was that 23 % of the women preoperatively diagnosed with EIN on an endometrial biopsy were postoperatively discovered with endometrial carcinoma upon hysterectomy sampling. Conclusion: Although EIN has a high likelihood of progression to carcinoma, we consider these findings to be simultaneous occurrences of endometrial carcinoma due to the short time interval between diagnosis and treatment. Objective: Congenital malformations are the most important causes of fetal death and they can be defined as structural or functional anomalies that occur during intrauterine life. In the last year, in Emergency University Hospital, Bucharest, were performed 7 fetus autopsies with the clinical diagnosis of Polycystic Renal Disease. 4 of them, including this case, had Congenital Multicystic Renal Dysplasia. Method: We performed the autopsy of a 22 week old male fetus from an uninvestigated pregnancy. The autopsy report highlighted multiple malformations. We collected representative tissular fragments for histological examination, which have been processed by the classical stain H&E. Results: During the autopsy, the following were noted: ELBW-700 g fetus, postaxial polydactily of all limbs, club feet and distended abdominal wall by the presence of bilateral renal enlargement: kidneys with multiple cortical and medular cystic spaces, without pelvocaliceal occlusion, bladder abnormalities and urethral athresia. Histologically, the kidneys showed noncommunicating, irregular cysts of varying sizes in the renal and cortical region and dysplastic ducts lined by a columnar epithelium surrounded by fusiform cells. There were also few normal tubules and dystropic ones. Conclusion: This is our hospital's first case of congenital renal dysplasia that associates polydactyly and club feet, without having other urogenital malformation and liver pathological features. Objective: Tumour-to-tumour metastasis (TTM) is a rare phenomenon corresponding to metastasis in a histologically distinct tumour. Adenocarcinoma represents 5-15 % of invasive cervical carcinomas and ovarian metastasis are not unusual. Mature cystic teratomas (MCT) account for 60 % of benign ovarian tumours and somatic malignant transformation is uncommon (1-2 %). There are no previous reports of MCT involved in TTM events. Method: We report a case of tumour-to-tumour metastasis of an endocervical adenocarcinoma to an ovarian mature cystic teratoma. Results: A 51-year-old patient presented with a cervical lesion histologically diagnosed as a poorly differentiated, HPV18+, adenocarcinoma. Staging showed a IIA2 (FIGO 2009) cervical carcinoma associated with a left ovarian multicystic tumour suggestive of teratoma with a radiological suspicious area. A bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. A left MCT with 11 × 4 × 3 cm was confirmed and a solid area with 2 cm of adenocarcinoma, morphologically similar to the cervical adenocarcinoma, was found. A similar immunoprofile (p16+, CEA+, vimentin-, ER-) in both adenocarcinomas was documented. HPV18DNA+ in both confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic endocervical adenocarcinoma in a mature cystic teratoma. Conclusion: Similar morphology, immunohistochemistry and HPVDNA in both malignant component of MCT and endocervical adenocarcinoma confirmed a TTM and excluded a more common, although rare, MCT malignant transformation in a perimenopausal patient. Objective: To investigate the immunohistochemical pecularities of recurrent ovarian endometriosis. Method: The study included 52 patients with recurrent ovarian endometriosis and 36 patients without recurrence, who undergone laparoscopy with stripping technique using «Karl Storz» equipment with histological investigation. Immunohistochemistry was performed using immunohistostainer Bond-max (Leica, Germany) with the use of monoclonal antibodies: to estrogen (ER) and progesterone (PR) receptors, Ki-67, bcl-2, p53, b-katenin. Results: The expression of ERβ was 33 % in recurrent endometriosis, in non-recurrent samples-30 % (p < 0,05). The expression of PR was significantly higher in Group II (30 vs 55 %, p = 0,045). Analysis of bcl-2 expression showed that its level was higher in group I-59 % (p = 0,039). The expression of p53 was 4 times less than in group of recurrence (4 vs 19 %, p = 0,048). There was a statistically significant increase in the expression of Ki-67 and b-catenin (respectively, 25 vs 12 %, p = 0,042 and 51 vs 38 %, p = 0,039). Conclusion: Immunohistochemical assessment revealed significant differences in the expression rates of proliferation, apoptosis and intercellullar adhesion indicators in recurrent ovarian endometriosis, which will subsequently allow to work out a personalized approach to the management of patients. Objective: Endometriosis is a common condition found in women undergoing laparotomy. However, atypical endometriosis is rare. It is characterized histologically by endometriotic glands with cytologic and/or architectural atypia. Method: The incidence of ovarian atypical endometriosis (AEM) in a consecutive series of cases during the period 2013 to 2016 was studied The diagnosis of atypical endometriosis was based on the presence of large hyperchromatic or pale nuclei with moderate to marked pleomorphism; increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio; and cellular crowding, stratification, or tufting. Three or more of these criteria must be present. Results: 6 cases of atypical endometriosis were found in a series of 175 typical endometriosis (3,5 %), 5 were in the ovary and 1 in the fallopian tube.Of the ovary AEMs, 3 were associated with a borderline or malignant tumour, 1 was associated with teratoma. Conclusion: The ovary is the most common site for development of malignancy in endometriosis; however, little is known about the incidence of ovarian atypical endometriosis and its association with ovarian malignant epithelial tumours The process of damage, repair, and scarring over a long period may play a role in the development of endometriosis into AEM and eventually into tumour formation. Objective: To investigate expression anti-viral receptors of innate immunity NOD1, TLR9 in the structural elements of placenta and myometrium samples in patients with severe preeclampsia. Method: The immunohistological study was performed on the 15 serial paraffin slices of placenta and myometrium: 9 samples collected from women with severe preeclampsia (PE), 6 samples-with normal pregnancy (NP), using NOD1 primary monoclonal antibodies (1:100; Termo scientific), TLR9 (1:500; Genetex). The intensity of immunohistochemical reaction was estimated by means of Nikon Eclipse microscope imaging software (NIS-Elements). Results: The immunohistochemical study indicated NOD1 and TLR9 cytoplasmic staining in amnion, major and minor subset of decidual cells, syncytiotrophoblast, syncytial knots, cells of stroma, endothelium of vessels of placental villi. NOD1 demonstrated more intensive staining in syncytiotrophoblast and endothelium of stem and intermediate placental villi in women with NP, than with PE (p < 0,05)(0,46 ± 0,052, 0,40 ± 0,043 and 0,45 ± 0,24; 0,36 ± 0,038, respectively). We observed irregular with marked fluctuations TLR9 expression staining in syncytiotrophoblast and endothelium of placental villi in preeclamptic women than in NP. In PE NOD1 and TLR9 demonstrated irregular expression of markers with significant variations in neighboring cells in myometrium. Conclusion: Disturbance of innate immunity receptors expression (NOD1, TLR9) both in placenta and myometrium associated in severe PE. Objective: To study distribution of cervical lesions diagnosed by pap smear in Tunisian population in which cervical cancer incidence is known to be low. Method: A retrospective study with analysis of results in pap smears with epithelial cell abnormalities. Results: Out of 44,057 pap smears, 247 cases (0,6 %) demonstrated epithelial abnormalities. Patients' age ranged from 22 to 77 years (mean age = 48). Reporting of the slides was done according to the 2014 Bethesda system and results were as follows: Atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASC-US) was seen in 37 (15 %), atypical squamous cells that cannot exclude HSIL (ASC-H) in 13 (5 %), low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (LSIL) in 43 (18 %), high grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL) in 37 (15 %), squamous cell carcinoma in 68 (28 %), Atypical glandular cells (AGC) in 33 (13 %) and adenocarcinoma in 16 (6 %) cases. Conclusion: In our study, less than 1 % of all pap smears contained epithelial cell abnormalities. This could be explained by the low incidence of cervical cancer in our country. It has been shown that about two thirds of cervical cytology were for malignant and premalignant lesions and one third for undetermined lesions. Objective: We investigated the expression of ER, PR, Her2/neu, Ki67 in 38 cases of endometrial carcinomas (EC) from Egyptian patients to evaluate the correlation with histopathologic features, in an attempt to sub classify endometrial carcinoma based on molecular parameters. Method: Immunohistochemical (IHC) study of ER, PR, Her2/neu and Ki67 was performed on hysterectomy specimen of 38 patients diagnosed with EC between January 2004 and December 2007. Results: ER was detected in 45 % of cases and significantly associated with old age, absence of necrosis and absence of associated hyperplasia (P = 0.022, 0.012 and 0.034, respectively). PR positivity was determined in 58 % of cases and was significantly associated with old age, infiltrative pattern of invasion and cervical invasion (P = 0.031, 0.037 and 0.026 respectively). Her2/neu was expressed in 5 % of cases. Low expression of Ki67 was encountered in 37 % of cases while 63 % exhibited high Ki67 labelling index. PR and ER expressions in endometrial carcinoma cases were significantly correlated (P = 0.005). On the other hand, neither PR nor ER expression was significantly associated with Her2/neu or Ki67 expression in endometrial carcinoma. Conclusion: Immunohistochemical markers should be thoroughly investigated and considered as reliable parameters in the selection of hormonal or targeted therapy for endometrial carcinoma. Objective: Carcinogenic pathways in ovarian high-grade serous carcinomas are a problem of debate in gynecological pathology. We intended a contributive study to the panel of information for this malignant tumour. Method: We performed a 5-year retrospective study of 85 ovarian highgrade serous carcinomas registered at Victor Babes National Institute of Pathology. We analyzed patients' age, clinical history, histopathological features and immunohistochemistry expression for WT1, p53, ER, PR, Ki67, VIM, CK7, CK20, CEA, VIM, CA125. Results: The mean age of patients was 58 years old. 4 patients had bilateral tumours and 6 presented with extrapelvic peritoneal extension. Positivity for WT1 was focal in 6 cases of 77 (8 %) and diffuse for the rest; p53 wild pattern expression was noticed in 12 of 27cases (44 %); PR was positive in 30 of 51 cases (59 %); Ki67 > 60 % was observed in 24 of 60 cases (40 %); VIM was positive in 7 of 21 cases (33 %). We had one case of CK7 negative and two cases of CEA focally positive. Conclusion: We found higher percentages of p53 expression of wild pattern type (not associated with TP53 mutation) and PR positivity than other data in the literature. Our study emphasizes the high variability of this type of malignancy and that further studies are still necessary in understanding its biology and molecular mechanisms. Bilateral high-grade serous carcinoma of the fallopian tube: Case report M. Popa * , A. Poteca, F. Andrei * Emergency University Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania Objective: We report the case of a 47 year-old woman with bilateral tubal high-grade serous carcinoma forming large intraluminal masses associated with serous intraepithelial lesions which is a rare finding in pathology practice. Method: The patient previously diagnosed with HSIL, presented with normocytic anemia and abnormal vaginal bleeding and discharge and underwent total hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy. Both fallopian tubes were dilated at their fimbriated end (maximum 7 cm in diameter) and were intraoperatively mistaken for hematosalpinx. Histopathological examination and immunohistochemistry tests were performed. Results: Histopathological examination revealed bilateral intraluminal masses with parietal invasion and serous tubal intraepithelial lesions consistent with primary bilateral tubal high-grade serous carcinoma with extension to the ovaries (pT2a), intramural uterine leiomyoma, HSIL of the uterine cervix. Immunohistochemistry results of the tumour specimen: WT1 positive, p53 moderate nuclear expression in 40 % tumour cell nuclei, ER positive 20 %, PR negative, AR negative, CD44 patchy positive and predominant in cells at the subepithelial invasion front, Ki67 proliferation index of 50 %. Conclusion: Diagnosis of primary high-grade serous carcinoma of the fallopian tube can be challenging especially when ovarian involvement is present. Thus, careful examination in search of evident invasion from intraluminal mass and associated tubal intraepithelial neoplasia or carcinoma is necessary for making the correct statement. Objective: Effects of photoperiodism alteration on reproductive cycle have become widely reecognized, involving a distinct oxidative damage. Oxidative stress, based on the excessive production of reactive oxygen species, alters the ovulation and the ovarian integrity. Our study defines the relationship between the extent of the oxidative stress and its impact on ovarian histomorphology in rats as a result of light/ dark cycle alteration. Method: Female Wistar rats aged 7 weeks were randomly divided in two groups, a control group kept under conditions of controlled temperature (22-24°C) and a 12:24 light/dark cycle and an experimental group, maintained on a continuous light exposure during the whole experiment. Appropriate markers were chosen in order to analyse the extent of the oxidative stress(SOD, CAT, MDA); histopathological examination and immunohistochemistry study of monoclonal anti-8 Hydroxiguanosine antibody(8-OHdG) were realized to determine the ovarian oxidative impact. Results: We identified a high ovarian 8-OHdG immunoexpression level, together with significant increased follicular atresia, alteration of follicular development stages, apoptotic and degenerative processes, inhibitory action on thecal cells and affected oocyte quality. Conclusion: Light/dark cycle alteration is responsible for oxidative alteration in the rat ovary. Objective: Ovarian cancer is often diagnosed at stage of peritoneal seeding. Accurate diagnosis of peritoneal extension has paramount prognostic implication. Irritation of the peritoneum may lead to the presence of reactive mesothelial cells and make the diagnosis more difficult with metastatic ovarian cancer. PAX8 was found to be frequently expressed in primary epithelial ovarian carcinoma and increased the overall detection rate of metastatic ovarian carcinoma. The purpose of this study was to compare the immunostaining of PAX8 in malignant peritoneal effusion containing cells considered as coming from serous carcinoma of the ovary and the original tumour. Method: Retrospective anti-Pax8 immunostaining of 27 specimens (16 tissue blocks, 9 cell blocks and 5 cytocentrifugation slides, destained and immunostained) was performed. Results: . Detections rate of Pax8 was 100 % (16/16) of paraffin embedded serous carcinoma of the ovary, while detection rate in cell blocks and cytocentrifuge was 86 % (9/11). Conclusion: We conclude that Pax8 is a useful, sensitive and specific marker of ovarian serous carcinoma but the rate of negative PAX8 questions its use in the differential diagnosis of malignant ascites. Cell blocks and/or supplementary cytocentrifuges slides should be systematically prepared in all cases of peritoneal effusion. Objective: To describe a case of uterine inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour (IMT) with unusual histological features, aggressive clinical course and fatal outcome. Method: A 61 year old woman presented with a 10 cm uterine mass and extensive extrauterine disease. The uterine tumour had a multinodular appearance with areas of necrosis. The tumour exhibited varied morphology with cellular areas of spindle cell proliferation in a myxoid stroma as well as sheets of highly pleomorphic epithelioid cells with vesicular nuclei, large nucleoli and abundant amphophilic to eosinophilic cytoplasm mimicking anaplastic large cell lymphoma. Tumour cell necrosis and frequent mitoses including, atypical mitotic figures were found. The tumour showed strong ALK expression by immunohistochemistry. Fluorescence in situ hybridization for ALK gene rearrangement was positive in the tumour. The patient died of disease within 3 months of presentation. Conclusion: IMT of the female genital tract are rare and diagnostically challenging. These tumours are frequently under recognized and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of mesenchymal tumours of the female genital tract. It is critical to recognize these tumours especially the aggressive forms given the recent development of a novel ALK-targeted therapy, which may have a role in managing aggressive cases. Female adnexal tumour of wolffian probable origin two cases report and review of the literature L. Tirichine * , F. Kediha, Z. Moussaoui, W. Ouahioune, Y. Lamouti * Public Hospital Establishment, Dept. of Anatomical Pathology, Tamanrassat, Algeria Objective: fatwo is a rare usually benign tumour of presumptive wollfian origin that is characterized by a variety of epitheloide patterns simulating other pelvic tumours. it occurs mainly in the broad ligament. this tumour deserves to be well known because of its rarity that prompts to the confusion with other frequents tumours of a poor outcome. Method: we report cases of two patients aged 51 and 45 yo who presented with a painful pelvic swelling. ultrasound study shows adnexal masses that located respectively on the right broad ligament and in the left ovary. Results: the average size of tumours is 7 cm, they are firm with a solid and cystic appearance in the cut surface containing clear to hemorrhage fluid the tumour is well circumscribed and shows an admixture of different histological patterns of variably shaped bland cells that are positive for pan ck, ck7, ck19, vimentin, calretinine. Conclusion: fatwos are rare benign tumours with a potential malignant behavior in some cases. it should be differentiated from other possibilities diagnosis with careful pathological and immunohistochemical examination. no standard therapeutic protocol and the role of adjuvant therapies is questionable after the surgery after which a carful fellow up of patients for long period is necessary. E-PS-07-020 Bilateral dysgerminomas arising in gonadoblastomas in a 46XY karyotype phenotypic female D. Pisani * , J. De Gaetano * Mater Dei Hospital, Dept. of Histopathology, L-Imsida, Malta Objective: To describe the incidental discovery of bilateral gonadal malignancy in a young female presenting with amenorrhea and to review the literature on these malignancies. Method: An 18 year old female was being investigated for primary amenorrhea. Hormone analysis revealed high levels of leuteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone and low levels of oestradiol and progesterone. Ultrasound assessment showed bilateral atrophic ovaries. Menarch was induced with norethisterone but menstruation was irregular and ceased shortly after treatment withdrawal. Genetic analysis revealed a 46XY karyotype and hence, prophylactic bilateral salpingoöphorectomy was performed. Both ovaries had a speckled calcified cut surface and soft white nodules were visualised bilaterally. Histology showed an infiltrative dysgerminoma arising in a background calcified gonadoblastoma in both ovaries. The ovarian parenchyma was heavily calcified and no primordial follicle formation could be defined. Results: The patient is well and is undergoing treatment with bleomycinetoposide-cisplatin chemotherapy. Conclusion: Bilateral dysgerminomas arising in gonadoblastomas are exceedingly rare malignancies and occur almost exclusively in cases of ovarian dysgensis, particularly in the presence of the gonadoblastoma locus-harbouring Y-chromosome. They carry an excellent prognosis if caught early and prophylactic oöphorectomy is suggested in such cases. Objective: Ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumours are rare and usually are unilateral with a median age of less than 30 years at presentation. Functionally; they are classified into three groups based on hormonal secretions; Androgen, estrogen and no endocrine activity. Alpha fetoprotein is associated with germ cell neoplasms particularly yolk sac tumour. Method: Here we present a case of a 27 year old female with huge left ovarian mass and mildly elevated Alpha Fetoprotein (AFP), diagnosed as intermediate to poorly differentiated Sertoli-Leydig cell tumour with minor germ cell component. AFP staining was negative in most of the tumour except in small glands in a single focus (2 × 1 mm) which was also positive for glypican-3 and SALL-4, thus representing a small focus of yolk sac tumour, the source of AFP. Results: Review of literature revealed only 30 cases associated with elevated AFP. We suggest that cases of Sertoli-Leydig cell tumours with elevated AFP must be examined thoroughly with multiple levels for small foci of yolk sac tumour, which may be the source of AFP elevation. Conclusion: We suggest that cases of Sertoli-Leydig cell tumours with elevated AFP must be examined thoroughly with multiple levels for small foci of yolk sac tumour, which may be the source of AFP elevation. Objective: Glucose transporter-1 (Glut-1) is a membrane glycoprotein responsible for the regulation of glucose uptake. Increased expression of Glut-1 seems to be an important not only as a cell Objective: We present a case of androgen-secreting stromal luteoma of the ovary in a patient of 41 years old with clinical manifestations of virilization. Results: 41 year old woman presenting 6 month of progressive virilization and amonorreha and high serum levels of testosterone. A left oophorectomy was performed making the diagnosis of a 1.8 cm Stromal Luteoma. After surgery the testosterone serum level decreased and virilization manifestations gradually disappear. Conclusion: Steroid cell tumours account for 0.1 % of all ovarian neoplasms and 20 % of them correspond to benign stromal luteoma. An important feature of this tumour is its hormonal secretion and only 12 % are associated with androgenic manifestations. The microscopic examination of these tumours must include an exhaustive study to discard the presence of crystals of Reinke. It is important to not make an equivocal diagnosis of steroid cell tumour not otherwise specified which can have a malignant behavior and a worst prognosis, with presence of extraovarian disease in the momento of diagnosis in some cases. Histologically these lesions should be differentiated from pregnancy luteoma, clear cell carcinoma, hepatoid carcinoma, luteinized thecoma, and metastatic renal cell carcinoma and melanoma. Objective: Classical factors as histomorphology, grade, International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage (FIGO stage) and residual tumour size have prognostic value in advanced epithelial ovarian carcinomas (AEOC). AEOCs have poor overall survival (OS), and early recurrence rate. Despite poor prognosis and advanced stage at time of diagnosis in particular cases long-term survival (LTS) was observed. We have studied how classical prognostic factors and molecular factors as β-catenin, E-cadherin, MiB-1, p53 predict long-term survival. Method: The expression of β-catenin, E-cadherin, MiB-1, p53 proteins was determined immunohistochemically, with Tissue Microarray (TMA) technic. The effect of protein expressions and classical factors on overall survival was evaluated with Kaplan-Meier estimation and Cox proportional-hazards model. Results: Residual tumour size as classical marker was observed as adverse independent prognostic factor for OS supporting previous observations (p = 0.003). Nuclear expression of β-catenin was observed as an independent favourable predictor for LTS (p = 0.025). Additionally strong correlation was found between nuclear β-catenin expression and sensitivity or re-induction of platinum therapy. Conclusion: Nuclear β-catenin expression has significant correlation with LTS and has important role in platinum sensitivity. Moreover is supports the possibility of platinum re-induction in AEOC. Objective: Decidual cell groups outside the endometrium are named ectopic decidua or deciduosis, this condition can be seen rarely on the peritoneum during laparotomy for a cesarean section for pregnancy. Deciduosis is a benign transient condition, most commonly localized in the ovary, cervix and uterine serosa while the peritoneal localization is rare. It generally has no clinical symptoms; it therefore requires no therapeutic intervention. Method: A 30-year-old woman G1P0 asymptomatic underwent cesarean section at 39 weeks gestation. The laparotomy revealed greyish-yellow soft nodules on the parietal peritoneum. On histologic examination, the lesion was composed of large polygonal decidualized cells with abundant eosinophilic focally vacualated cytoplasm. The nuclei were regular with fine chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. Results: Decidual cells showed immunoreactivity for vimentin, D-240 and progesterone receptor; CK EA1/EA3 (+ mesothelial cells). And negativity for: Calretinin, CK 5/6, S-100, HMB-45, EMA and CEA. Conclusion: -Pregnancy-related peritoneal deciduosis develops as a result of metaplasia of subserosal stromal cells with the effect of the progesterone hormone during pregnancy and it regresses within the 4-6 weeks duration after pregnancy with decidual involution. -Immunohistochemistry may help the differential diagnosis of peritoneal deciduosis where problems are experienced differentiating the case from malignant mesothelioma, metastatic carcinoma or melanoma. Objective: To describe a case of vulvovaginal cellular pseudosarcomatous fibroepithelial stromal polyp (CPFSP) associated to invasive squamous cell carcinoma in a post-menopausal woman. Method: A 83-year-old woman presented with a 6 cm vulvovaginal polypoid mass that underwent biopsy, followed shortly by an "explosive" recurrence. A left vulvectomy was performed. To date neither recurrences nor metastasis have been detected. Results: Histology revealed a polypoid ulcerated heterogeneous neoplasm. The stromal component consisted of a patternless, densely cellular, mitotically active proliferation of fusiform or stellated cells with markedly pleomorphic, hyperchromatic nuclei in a myxoid or variabily collagenized matrix with necrotic foci. Immunohistochemically these cells were positive for vimentin, actin and CD10 and negative for cytokeratins, EMA, CEA, estrogen and progesterone receptors, desmin, S100, CD34, CD31 and p16. Overexpression of p53 was observed. The epithelial component consisted of an infiltrating, moderately-differentiated, keratinising squamous cell carcinoma with in situ component. Conclusion: Although concomitant hyperplastic-dysplastic changes of the epithelial surface have been described in CPFSP, to our knowledge an association with invasive carcinoma, that can lead to misdiagnosis of carcinosarcoma, has not been reported. A hypotetical relationship with overexpression of p53, not previously evaluated in these neoplasms, is considered. Objective: Chemotherapy is a common type of preoperative neoadjuvant treatment and postoperative adjuvant or palliative therapy for many different types of malignancy. Certain chemotherapeutic agents can induce bizarre epithelial atypia that mimics malignancy. Unfamiliarity with these changes could potentially cause confusion with a neoplastic or infectious process. The endometrium is one of the few sites where chemotherapyinduced epithelial atypia has not been appreciated. Method: We identified four patients with marked cytologic atypia of the endometrial glandular epithelium from the surgical pathology files of the Severance Hospital. The medical records of these patients were reviewed. All patients underwent hysteroscopic examination with endometrial curettage for investigation of vaginal bleeding. They had previously undergone chemotherapy for uterine cervical cancer (n = 1), rectal cancer (n = 2) and myelodysplastic syndrome (n = 1). The chemotherapy regimens included alkylating agents (busulfan, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, cisplatin and oxaliplatin), pyrimidine antagonists (capecitabine, decitabine and 5-fluorouracil), taxane (paclitaxel) and topoisomerase inhibitors (irinotecan and etoposide). Results: Histopathologically, the atypical epithelial changes included marked nuclear enlargement and pleomorphism, degenerative-looking chromatin pattern, microvacuolation of abundant cytoplasm and preservation of nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio. Conclusion: This study demonstrated that certain chemotherapeutic agents may cause bizarre, reactive atypia of the endometrial glandular epithelium. These changes should not be interpreted as neoplastic or infectious in nature. An awareness of prior exposure to cytotoxic agents, and a familiarity with the nature and distribution of these bizarre alterations is essential to avoiding misinterpretation of the morphologic features and preventing unnecessary treatment. Objective: Psammocarcinoma is a rare form of serous carcinoma that can arise from the ovaries or peritoneum. It is characterized by massive psammoma body formation, invasion to surrounding structures and low grade cytologic features. Method: We report a case of a 60-year-old hysterectomized woman who presented with ascites and raised CA-125 level. On microscopic examination, the cytologic findings in ThinPrep and cell-block of peritoneal washing were three-dimensional papillary columnar cell groups with l o w g r a d e c y t o l o g i c a t y p i a a n d p s a m m o m a b o d i e s . Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic cells were positive for WT-1, Estrogene, Ca-125, MOC-31, TAG-72, negative for Calretinin, D2-40, CDX2, TTF-1. After that, the paraffin blocks of the patient which was diagnosed as endosalpingiosis is re-evaluated in our pathology department. Results: Histological examination of paraffin block revealed tumour with numerous psammoma bodies with occasional small epithelial clusters between psammoma bodies on the surface of both bilateral ovaries and fallopian tubes. Neoplastic epithelial cells showed mild-moderate cytological atypia. Conclusion: Psammomatous calcification is associated with benign and malignant pathology in different organ system including the gynaecological tract. The condition should be considered in the differential diagnosis. Clinical behavior is similar to borderline serous tumours with a favorable prognosis. Comparison of Human Papillomavirus (HPV) detection in urine and cervical samples using high-risk HPV DNA testing in Northern Thailand S. Khunamornpong * , J. Settakorn, K. Sukpan, S. Lekawanvijit, S. Siriaunkgul * Chiang Mai University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Pathology, Thailand Objective: To compare the detection of human papillomavirus (HPV) using high-risk HPV DNA testing in paired urine and cervical samples from women in Northern Thailand. Method: Paired urine and cervical samples were collected during the follow-up of women who had a previous positive HPV test. HPV testing was performed using Cobas 4800 HPV test. Results: Paired urine and cervical samples were obtained from 168 women. The rate of invalid testing was higher in urine samples than in cervical samples (26.8 versus 0.6 %, p < 0.001). Among 123 paired samples with valid test results, 24 were HPV-positive in both samples, 11 in cervical samples only, and 6 in urine samples only. Using HPV detection in cervical samples as a reference, the sensitivity of urine HPV testing was 68.9 %, specificity; 93.2 %, positive predictive value; 80.0 %, and negative predictive value; 88.1 %. In 24 HPV-positive paired samples, 22 (91.7 %) had concordant genotyping results provided by Cobas test. Objective: A fibroma is a benign stromal tumour composed of spindled to ovoid fibroblastic cells producing collagen. About 10 % of fibromas are densely cellular but exhibit no more than mild aytpia. These are referred to as cellular fibromas. In 2014 World Health Organization(WHO) histological classification, mitotic activity of >4 per 10HPF in an ovarian cellular fibromatous neoplasm in the absence of moderate to severe atypia is defined as mitotically active cellular fibroma(MACF). Method: A 42-year-old women presented with adnexial mass. Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed, with a 11 × 9.5 × 8 cm mass being disclosed from the right ovary. Macroscopically, the tumour was firm, fibrous, well delimited, yellow-white without gross necrosis. Histologically, it was composed of a densely cellular proliferation of fibrolastic-like cells with bland nuclear features and arranged in a fascicular pattern. There was no significant atypia or necrosis. Mitotic index was 7/10HPFs. The spindle cells were positive for SMA while the kaldesmon was negative. Ki67 proliferative index of tumour was determined as 2 %. Results: MACFs are in general associated with favorable outcome, but they may recur especially with rupture, adherence, or difficult dissection. Thus, long-term clinical follow-up is recommended. Conclusion: MACF is a recent histopathologic entity and should be distinguished from ovarian fibrosarcoma. Objective: Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumours(ES/ PNET) are high-grade malignant neoplasms that typically arise within the skeletal system. Primary extraskeletal ES/PNETs are uncommon and have been reported in various sites, the most frequent being the chest wall, lower extremities, and the paravertebral region. Few cases of primary vulvar of ES/PNET have been published before. Method: A 27-year-old patient presented with 3 cm solid mass located on her right labium minus. The pathological evaluation revealed a malignant neoplasm with nodular growth pattern in a fibrous background. The cells had uniform round nuclei, coarse chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli, and eosinophilic or clear scanty cytoplasm. The brisk mitotic activity and necrosis were observed. PAS staining showed cytoplasmic positivity in neoplastic cells. In the immunohistochemical analysis, the cells exhibited diffuse-positive membrane staining with CD99, vimentin, NSE, Bcl-2 while the HMB45, CK20, CK7, EMA, S100, TTF-1, LCA, TdT, desmin and myogenin were negative. We could not applied Fli-1. There was no tumour in other regions by whole-body scan. The patient did not receive any treatment. Results: She is still alive with stable disease after 1 year of follow up. Conclusion: Based on the literature, it appears that extraskeletalES/ PNET arising in superficial sites such as the vulva have better prognosis. Objective: An important prognostic factor for endometrial cancer is the degree of myometrial invasion. In the absence of deep myometrial invasion, lymph node metastasis is very low. Method: Thestudyincludedallcasesoftotalhysterectomywithpelviclymph node dissection performed between 01/01/10 and 31/12/2013 at Royal Surrey County Hospital. Histology data regarding the histological type, grade, depth of myometrial invasion, presence/ absence of lymphovascular invasion and lymph node metastasis, and stage of disease was obtained from Winpath database. Correlation was made with depth of invasion and lymphadenopathy documented in the radiology reports where available. Results: Of the 98 cases analysed, 7(7.1 %) showed lymph node metastasis. Six out of seven (86 %) of the lymph node positive cases were grade 3 carcinomas involving outer half of the myometrium with lymphovascular invasion. Of the 47 cases (48 %) available for radiological correlation, 27 (57 %) showed concordance with regards to FIGO stage. Conclusion: Lower grade endometrial cancers and those with no or less than 50 % myometrial invasions are unlikely to have lymph node metastasis. However, the best predictor of this pre-operatively is accurate staging of endometrial cancers on imaging. Further detailed evaluation is necessary to improve pathological-radiological concordance. Objective: While the true incidence remains undetermined, arteriovenous malformation (AVM) in the uterus is a rare entity that is potentially life-threatening from massive hemorrhage. Uterine AVM can be either congenital or acquired with the latter being more frequent and often preceded by uterine trauma including artificial abortions via dilatation and curettage, surgeries, cesarean delivery, trophoblastic diseases, endometrial and cervical carcinomas and infections. Patients with acquired AVM usually present with menorrhagia or menometrorrhagia following a miscarriage or recurrent pregnancy loss. Stromomyoma, also known as endometrial stromal tumour with smooth muscle cell differentiation, is another rare entity of the uterus. Uterine AVM associated with benign mesenchymal tumour is very rarely reported. Conclusion: We report a 45-year old woman who was initially diagnosed with a 10 cm leiomyoma. She presented to the clinic for menorrhagia for 4 years. Dysmenorrhea accompanied the profuse menorrhagia. She had a parity of 2-0-2-2 with 2 natural abortions. Transvaginal ultrasound showed a 10 cm mass at the anterior wall of the uterus, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the same mass with strong heterogeneous enhancement protruding from myometrium into uterine cavity suspicious of a submucosal leiomyoma Postoperative pathologic examination revealed AVM arising in a stromomyoma. Physical examination revealed blood clots and tissue fragments protruding from the external os, which were sent to pathological analysis. After the initial diagnosis the patient underwent hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Results: Gross examination showed a polypoid neoplasm with 2,4 × 1,2 cm, located in the uterine corpus. Microscopically, the tumour was biphasic with a benign epithelial component scattered among a malignant stromal component. The later showed typical periglandular cuffing and focal formation of polypoid fronds that projected into glands. Objective: Heterotopic adrenal cortex is a rare entity usually discovered in male infants, around the kidney, retroperitoneum, spermatic cord or in the para-testicular area. There is little information about adults with ectopic adrenal glans in the scientific literature. Incidence in females is noticeably lower and occasionally identified in hysterectomy specimens. Method: We report a series of 3 cases of postmenopausal females ages 66, 67 and 76 years, histopathologically diagnosed with endometrial cancer. All women presented with abnormal vaginal bleeding and underwent endometrial biopsy followed by radical hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and regional lymph node excision. Results: A though histopathological analysis of the three hysterectomy specimens established the diagnoses of well and moderately differentiated endometrial endometrioid carcinoma, stages pT1bN0M0 and pT2N0M0 respectively, as well as carcinosarcoma of the uterine corpus, stage pT1cN0M0. Sections from the fallopian tubes of all three women revealed well encapsulated ectopic adrenal cortical rests of various sizes, located in the paratubal region. Conclusion: We report this series of cases due to the rarity of ectopic adrenal tissue in females, its interesting presentation in association with unrelated gynaecological pathology, as well as its potential complications and possibility for malignant transformation. Objective: Cervical cancer is caused by the sexually transmitted Human Papilloma virus (HPV) which is the most common viral infection of the reproductive tract. Long standing infection with specific types of HPV (especially types 16 and 18) may lead to pre-invasive lesions. Recently, attention has been focused on p16 and Ki67 as biomarkers with potential utility in the identification pre-invasive cervical lesions. Method: We assessed the application of p16 in the detection of preinvasive cervical lesions on cervical samples seen in our department in 2012 and 2013. Results: The age range of the subjects was from 24 to 76 years with a mean age of 42 years. The initial diagnosis were as follows: chronic nonspecific cervicitis:38.5 %, CIN1: 23.1 %, CIN2: 7.7 %, CIN3: 11.5 %, CIS: 7.7 %, moderate dysplasia: 3.8 % and normal cervix: 7.7 %. After p16 staining, 76.9 % were interpreted as negative for p16, atrophy 3.8 %, CIN1 7.7 %, CIN2 7.7 % and CIN3 3.8 %. Conclusion: We conclude that p16 is of great importance especially in differentiating between reactive/chronically inflamed cervix and CIN and also in differentiating between the various stages of CIN. We propose that with the limited resources available, p16 staining should be done after peer review of cervical biopsies that are suspicious on H&E. Objective: Malignant mixed mullerian tumours are a rare histologic subtype of ovarian cancer composed of an admixture of both malignant epithelial and mesenchymal elements. Its infrequency and aggressiveness make this subtype interesting to know. Method: We report a case of a 59 year old woman, who presented with abdominal pain. The CT scan showed a solidocystic latero-uterine mass extended to the sigmoid. Histology combined to immunochemistry showed an admixture of malignant epithelial and stromal elements. The malignant epithelial element was a high grade endometroid carcinoma. The stromal component was a chondrosarcoma. Results: Malignant mixed mullerian tumour is a rare histologic subtype diagnosed in 1-4 % of all ovarian cancer survivors. It is an aggressive tumour occurring in postmenopausal, often diagnosed in advanced stages. The clinical presentation is similar to ovarian epithelial tumours. On imaging, it is not possible to differentiate it from other ovarian neoplasms; therefore the diagnosis is essentially based on histopathologic findings. In addition to conventional histology, immunohistochemistry is an essential low cost ancillary technique in highlighting biphasic nature and areas of heterologous differentiation which may have a prognostic impact. Conclusion: This case illustrates a rare tumour that should be distinguished from other forms of ovarian carcinomas because of its ominous prognosis. Objective: Imaging-guided omental biopsy(IGOB) is commonly used to diagnose advanced stage malignancy. Data on diagnostic findings in IGOB are scant and our impression is that primary site and subtype information is non-specific. As the specific diagnosis of extrauterine high grade serous carcinoma(HGSC) has therapeutic, prognostic and genetic implications, we particularly wished to establish the frequency of HGSC and thus potentially guide appropriate immunohistochemistry(IHC). Method: 84 consecutive reports (In-house = 60, referral = 24) of malignant female IGOB (March 2013-December 2015) were retrieved and relevant data (clinical,IHC,diagnosis) collated. Results: The pre-test probability(PTP) of HGSC in female IGOB was high with a final HGSC diagnosis in 57 cases(68 %), rising to 77 % in patients with no prior histologic diagnosis of malignancy. Historic or nonspecific terminologies were common including; papillary serous carcinoma(18 %), ovarian adenocarcinoma(12 %). The remainder of diagnoses comprised a miscellany of primary sites, with gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma comprising 5 cases. Conclusion: The majority of malignancies in female IGOB were HGSC with the frequency of this diagnosis being over 10-fold that of any other malignancy. Awareness of this finding may assist the general pathologist to avoid non-specific diagnoses and deploy a more targeted IHC panel ab initio (such as WT1, P53, PAX-8, P16) in the setting of a malignant IGOB. E-PS-07-043 Primary extrauterine endometrial stromal sarcoma: Case report C. Socoliuc * , R. Andrei, A. Evsei * Synevo Romania, Bucuresti, Romania Objective: Extrauterine endometrial stromal sarcoma, also known as endometrioid stromal sarcoma, represents a rare occurrence, with less than 100 cases reported. This neoplasm is frequently associated with endometriosis and may involve the ovaries, fallopian tube, vagina, bowel wall, pelvic cavity, abdominal cavity and retroperitoneum. Method: We present the case of a 65 years old woman with a large pelvic tumour, 113/72/60 mm and secondary grade IV ureterohydronephrosis. Fourteen years before the patient underwent hysterectomy for cervical squamous cell carcinoma followed by radiotherapy and the pelvic lesion was clinically considered tumour recurrence. Results: Microscopic examination of the pelvic mass revealed a hypercellular diffuse and vague-fascicular proliferation of mildly atypical spindle cells with stromal arterioles, stromal hyalinization areas and cystic spaces. The tumour presented hypocellular areas towards the periphery. The tumour cells were positive for vimentin, CD10, WT1, CD56, synaptophisin, CD99 and desmin and negative for cytokeratins. A final diagnosis of high grade extrauterine endometrial stromal sarcoma was rendered. Conclusion: The diagnosis of an extrauterine endometrial stromal sarcoma is challenging, requiring clinical-pathological correlations and exclusion of a primary uterine lesion, of other more frequent types of sarcoma and exclusion of sarcomatoid carcinoma. Objective: We report a case of pure large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma of the ovary in 32-years old woman. Her past medical history includes juvenile granulosa cell tumour of the left ovary, she presented with a pelvic mass measuring 10 cm in diameter. Method: the patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy for resection of the right palpable adnexal mass. Results: Histologically, the tumour is composed of islands, nests and cords separated by a thin stroma. The cells are medium to large in size with hyperchromatic and nucleoli with numerous mitoses. Immunohistochemicaly, the tumour cells are positive for EMA, synaptophysin, chromogranin A and CD56, and negative for inhibin and calretinin. Conclusion: Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) of the ovary is a rare and aggressive tumour, frequently associated with ovarian surface epithelial tumours. The prognosis of LCNECs is generally very poor even when the diagnosis is made at an early stage. Only 9 cases of pure large cells neuroendocrine carcinoma have been reported in the literature. On laparotomy, the mass was found to be of ovarian origin. A left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. Results: On gross examination, the ovary measured 38 × 38 × 20 cm and had a firm smooth surface. On cut section, it was solid and cystic. Microscopic examination of the tumour showed an adenofibromatous pattern. The epithelial component was made of mildly crowded glands that had focal moderate cytologic atypia and epithelial stratification. The stromal component was fibrotic, without cytonuclear atypia. On immunohistochemistry (IHC), the epithelial component was positive with CK7 and EMA. The tumour cells did not stain with CD10 and α-inhibin. A diagnosis of a borderline endometrioid tumour developed on an adenofibroma was retained. Conclusion: Ovarian endometrioid adenofibroma of borderline malignancy is a rare tumour that often requires proper sampling and IHC for the correct diagnosis. Pathologists should be aware of this entity such as not to misdiagnose it as a malignant tumour. Objective: To present the case of a patient who had an ovarian fibroma associated to peritoneal tuberculosis that was clinically misdiagnosed as an advanced ovarian cancer. To discuss means of differentiating peritoneal tuberculosis from advanced ovarian cancer in light of literature data. Method: A 65-year-old woman presented with progressive abdominal distension. Abdominopelvic MRI showed an ovarian heterogeneous mass suspicious for malignancy. The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, a 10 cm ovarian tumour was found, with peritoneal seedings that were misdiagnosed as carcinomatosis. A bilateral salpingooophorectomy was performed. Results: On gross examination, the right ovary measured 10,5 × 8 × 5 cm, had a firm consistency, a whitish cut surface with myxoid change. There was miliary seedings scattered over the surfaces of the two ovaries and fallopian tubes. Histologic examination showed a spindle cell proliferation on the right ovary, morphologically consistent with an ovarian fibroma. This was associated to extensive granulomatous inflammation with epithelioid cells and typical multinucleated giant cells of Langhans type,involving bilateral adnexa. The diagnosis of an ovarian fibroma associated to peritoneal tuberculosis was made. Conclusion: The treatment of peritoneal tuberculosis is based on medical therapy, it is therefore important to take tuberculosis into account when treating women with massive ascites and adnexal tumours in order to avoid unnecessary extensive surgery. We suggest exploratory laparotomy and intraoperative frozen pathology for the diagnosis of pelvic tuberculosis. Objective: Glassy cell carcinoma (GCC) was first described in the uterine cervix. Although uterine cervix is the most frequent site for this tumour, less than 1 % of cervical tumours are GCCs. Also, it has been described in endometrium, fallopian tubes, vagina, and colon. The incidence of GCC is extremely rare, only 14 cases have been reported in the English literature. Method: A 63-year-old woman, referred to gynecology clinic due to postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. After the diagnostic curettage, surgical staging has been performed. Macroscopic examination of the endometrial cavity showed no prominent residual mass, except for focal irregular areas. Right ovarian cut surface showed nodular solid area that was suspicious for metastasis. Only one right pelvic lymph node was invaded by tumour. Other organs were unremarkable. Results: Microscopic examination of endometrial curettage, focal tumour limited to the endometrium, ovary, and lymph node revealed solid irregular nests of large pleomorphic cells with moderate to abundant finely granular cytoplasm. Tumour cells nests were separated by fibrovascular septa with dense inflammatory background composed predominantly of plasma cells with an admixture of neutrophils, eosinophils and lymphocytes. Conclusion: Although cervical GCC has poor prognosis, the prognosis of its endometrial counterpart is unknown. But it seems to have an aggressive behavior. Objective: Lymphangioleiomyomatosis is a rare progressive disease that tends to affect young women of child-bearing age and is characterized by cystic destruction of the lung due to the proliferation of smooth muscle cells. Extrapulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis may or may not be associated with pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis and/or tuberous sclerosis complex. Here we present a case of lymph node lymphangioleiomyomatosis detected incidentally during surgical staging o f o v a r y c a r c i n o m a , n o t a s s o c i a t e d w i t h p u l m o n a r y lymphangioleiomyomatosis or tuberous sclerosis. Method: A 51 year-old woman diagnosed with endometrioid carcinoma of the ovary underwent an elective pelvic and paraaortic lymph node dissection. Results: As an incidental histological finding, some lymph nodes revealed a proliferation of myoid-appearing spindle cells arranged in intersecting fascicles disposed around irregular vascular spaces lined by flattened endothelial cells. No cellular atypia or mitotic activity was observed. Inmunohistochemistry revealed that cells showed expression for smooth muscle actin, desmin, focally for HMB-45, MITF, estrogen receptors and the D2-40 staining highlighted the endothelial cells revealing lymphatic vascular nature. Conclusion: Clinically occult lymphangioleiomyomatosis can be detected during surgical staging of pelvic cancer and is not commonly associated with pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis or tuberous sclerosis complex, although these patients should still be formally evaluated for both of these diseases. Objective: Hyperreactio luteinalis is a rare condition in which there is massive cystic enlargement of the ovaries mimicking malignancy during pregnancy. When confronted with this condition, the fear of missing a cancer diagnosis often leads the physician to react with unnecessary surgical intervention, potentially resulting in impaired future fertility. The purpose of this study is to emphasize the importance of recognizing the clinicopathological features of this tumour. Method: We report two cases with hyperreactio luteinalis. Clinical data and microscopic slides were reviewed. Results: They were two women aged 33 years old. The first patient presented at 39 weeks of gestation in labour and underwent a caesarean section. In a systematic exploration of the annexes, bilateral, enlarged cystic ovaries were seen. The cysts were thinwalled and without vegetations. Ovarian biopsy was performed showing cysts with regular luteinized cells within the wall and no histological evidence of malignancy, consisting with a diagnosis of hyperreactio luteinalis. In the second case, a left ovary cyst was fortuitously discovered during the first quarter ultrasound. Conservative treatment was done in the two cases. Conclusion: Management of hyperreactio luteinalis must be conservative and continued education of health care professionals who may encounter this entity is vital. Objective: A 27-year-old nulliparous patient consulted for vulvo-vajinal pain, bleeding and dysuria. On physical examination a soft bleeding mass filling the distal posterior vaginal wall was detected. Computerized tomography results showed a heterogenous mass of 15 × 13 × 10 cm which contain necrotic and cystic foci that is indistinguishable from the isthmus and cervix uteri. The patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy and partial vaginectomy. Method: On gross examination, the mass composed of solid, necrotic and cystic areas. Microscopically the vaginal epithelium lined the external circumference of the nodule which composed of endometrial stromal cells. Mitotic activity was low and neither stromal nor lymphovascular invasion were detected. Results: İmmunohistochemistry showed diffuse CD10 positivity by tumour cells. Desmin and caldesmon were negative. Conclusion: ESTs are usually uterin and myometrial lesions which can be intramural, subserozal and submucosal. Vagina is a very rare location for ESTs. Diagnosis can be quite difficult especially in curettage speciments. Objective: Experimental models of endometriosis successfully reproduce human pathology, offering basic support in deciphering the particular dynamics of its components. This study focused on the surgical induction of endometriosis in rats by autotransplantation of uterine fragment in the abdominal wall, followed by a morphologic evaluation of changes that occur in responsiveness of vascular, glandular and stromal components of endometrial implant. Method: Endometriosis was surgically induced in Wistar female rats by suturing distal uterine horn autoimplants to the abdominal wall. After 60 days, the implants were prelevated together with fragments of normal uterine horn, paraffin embedding, H&E staining and examined under Nikon Eclipse 50i light microscope, for the description of the endometrial status. Results: Inflammatory areas were absent and the glandular proliferative processes were abundant, with no specific sensitivity endometrial variations. Angiogenic processes were detected together with some stromal proliferation. Conclusion: There were no significant differences between the autotransplanted and control endometrium, supporting the use of such experimental models in approaching the unsolved aspects of endometriosis. Objective: Ovarian cancer is the most sixth common cancer in women. In gynecologic cancers, it is the second most cancer after endometrial cancer and the most lethal cancer. FIGO stage, residue tumour after surgery, patient's age, histological type, grade, capsule rupture, peritoneal washing status are the prognostic factors. The aim of this study is to investigate estrogene, receptor(ER) progesterone receptor(PR), CerbB2, p53 and BRCA1 expressions and determine its prognostic value in ovarian cancer. Method: The study population was comprised 85 patients with epithelial ovarian cancer who are diagnosed between 2002 and 2012. Immunohistochemical expression of ER, PR, CerbB2, P53 and BRCA1 and their relationship with clinicopathological parameters were evaluated. Results: In serous carcinomas (SC), there were significant correlations between ER expression with metastasis to fallopian tube, PR expression with patient's age, p53 expression with progression free survey (PFS) and cytoplasmic expression of BRCA1 with overall survey (OS) and PFS. There were significant differences with ER, PR and p53 expressions between type 1 and 2 tumours. In our study, PR and p53 were prognostic factors in SC. Conclusion: Large studies that contain more cases in each histological group are needed to determine the prognostic value of these five immunohistochemical markers. Tumour-to-tumour metastasis: Unexpected diagnosis to an expecting woman J. Tavares * , C. Ferreira, L. Correia * Hospital de Santa Maria, Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Lisbon, Portugal Objective: Krukenberg tumour is a rare form of metastatic gastric signetring cell carcinoma. Thecomas rarely occur during pregnancy and represent approximately 1 % of all ovarian tumours. The phenomenon of tumour-to-tumour metastasis has been described in roughly 100 cases and, to the best of our knowledge, thecoma have never been reported as receiving tumour. We present a unique case of gastric signet-ring cell carcinoma metastatic to a luteinized thecoma in a pregnant woman. Method: During a routine ultrasound to a 28 year-old pregnant woman, on the 13th gestational week, an ovarian tumour was incidentally discovered; oophorectomy was performed. Results: Grossly, the ovary was 14 × 10.7 × 5 cm and 462.1 g, with a white, lobulated cut surface, cystic and fasciculate areas. Histologically, the bulk of the tumour was composed of uniform cells, with pale cytoplasm and round to oval nuclei, without atypia; infiltrating signet-ring cells were detected, exhibiting a characteristic immunostaining pattern of gastro-intestinal origin. A Krukenberg tumour on a luteinized thecoma was diagnosed; gastric biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of poorly cohesive carcinoma of signet-ring cell type. Conclusion: Tumour-to-tumour metastasis is a rare event; nevertheless, we should bear it in mind as it can explain the presence of an unusual cytological pattern in a specific tumour. Correlation of visual inspection with cytological and histopathological findings in cervical neoplasia P. Sherpa * , A. D. Pant Objective: To evaluate the diagnostic value of Papanicolaou (PAP) smear and visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA) as methods of cervical cancer screening. Method: The study population consisted of women with histologically confirmed cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or invasive carcinoma who had undergone prior PAP smear. Results: During the study period 160 patients underwent both PAP smear and cervical biopsy. Of these patients, 49 had a histological diagnosis of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or invasive carcinoma. The histopathological and cytological diagnoses were compared. VIA status was available for 31 of the 49 cases. The sensitivity of PAP smear was 61 %, specificity 97 %, positive predictive value (PPV) 91 %, negative predictive value (NPV) 85 % and diagnostic accuracy 86 % in detection of cervical neoplasia. VIA had a sensitivity of 74 %, specificity 48 %, PPV 64 %, NPV 60 % and diagnostic accuracy of 63 %. Combining the two procedures increased sensitivity by 26 %, NPV by 11 % and diagnostic accuracy by 2 %. Conclusion: PAP smear has a higher specificity, PPV, NPV and diagnostic accuracy but lower sensitivity than VIA. VIA by itself is not an effective screening method. A combination of PAP smear and VIA can ensure adequate screening of cervical neoplasia. Results: 523 (68%) of endometriotic foci were located in ovaries, 160 (21%) were extraovarian and 85 (11%) affected ovary and extraovarian sites. 27 tumours were recorded: 12 endometrioid (EC), 7 clear cell (CCC) carcinomas, 2 adenosarcomas (AS), one with sarcomatous overgrowth, 1 endometrioid stromal sarcoma (ESS), 2 seromucinous borderline (BDRL), 2 clear cell BDRL and 1 serous BDRL tumours; representing 3,5% of endometriosis. CCC cell and EC were the malignancies most commonly seen in ovaries containing endometriosis (17/ 21), while all AS and ESS were seen in conjunction with extraovarian endometriosis (3/6 extraovarian neoplasms). Conclusion: Several types of neoplasms can exhibit an association with endometriosis, stronger in CCC and EC, with a selected anatomical distribution. E-PS-07-062 Mature cystic teratomas: A clinicopathologic evaluation of 225 cases P. Sherpa * , R. Baral * PAHS, Patan Hospital, Pathology, Lalitpur, Nepal Objective: To study the clinicopathologic behavior of mature cystic teratomas (MCT). Method: We conducted a retrospective study on a series of cases of MCT from April 2011-March 2016. Patient data were obtained and histology reviewed at Department of Pathology, Patan hospital, Lalitpur, Nepal. Results: MCT comprised 225 (56.1 %) out of total 399 cases of ovarian neoplasms. Bilaterality was noted in 9.8 % of the patients. The age range of patients was 8-74 years and majority (82, 36.4 %) were in age group of 21-30 years. The size of tumours ranged from 3.5 to 20 cm. Ischemic modifications, presumably due to torsion, were noted in 10.2 % of cases, mostly in tumours larger than 10 cm. None of the tumours of less than 5 cm presented with signs of torsion. Malignant transformation was present in 7 (3.1 %) cases and was seen especially in older patients and in larger tumours. Squamous cell carcinoma was the most common malignant tumour (5 cases). One case was a mixed germ cell tumour with components of MCT and yolk sac tumour. Conclusion: MCT is the most common germ cell tumour in patients of reproductive age group. Complications such as torsion and malignant transformation occur mostly in larger tumours. Objective: As ovarian tissue cryopreservation (OTCP) has proved to be a successful method for fertility preservation, the need for pathological evaluation of ovarian tissue in cancer patients prior to autologous transplantation has emerged. Our objective was to establish a structured methodology for histopathological evaluation prior to autologous ovarian transplantation in cancer patients. Method: A single team was responsible for a collaborative work between the Pathology Department, the Fertility Preservation Center, IVF unit, Obstetrics and Gynecology Division and the Cancer Research Center at the Sheba Medical Center. Herein we describe our experience in pathological assessment of ovarian tissue performed on samples from patients with varied background malignancies as part of fertility preservation procedure by OTCP and autologous transplantation. Results: We have established guidelines for the evaluation of ovarian tissue prior to autologous transplantation that rely on histomorphological evaluation assisted by immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH). In isolated cases tumour-specific molecular markers were sought using PCR. Conclusion: A tight collaboration between the pathologist and the fertility preservation unit is vital for the accurate assessment of ovaries prior to their transplantation. Adherence to the established guidelines may reduce the risks for the patients and increase the success rate of the procedure. Objective: Leiomyoadenomatoid tumour of the uterus is a variant of adenomatoid tumour which is extremely rare and may be difficult to recognize on microscopic examination. We reviewed the histopathological features of this rare entity and we discuss its differential diagnosis. Method: The morphologic and immunohistochemical findings of a leiomyoadenomatoid tumour located in the uterine wall are reported with a review of the related literature. Results: A 37-year-old woman presented with vaginal bleeding during the past 6 months. Pelvic ultrasonography revealed three masses in the myometrium. Laparoscopy transvaginal masses removal was performed under the clinical impression of uterine leiomyomas. Histological examination followed by immunohistochemistry straightened the diagnosis of leiomyoma in 1 mass and confirmed the presence of a biphasic proliferation: an adenomatoid component, which was immunoreactive with calretinin, intermingled with interlacing fascicles of neoplastic muscle cells. The diagnosis of leiomyoadenomatoid tumour along with two leiomyomas was made. The outcome was favorable without any complications at the 4 months follow up evaluation. Conclusion: Here in we report the tenth case of leiomyoadenomatoid tumour of the uterus. Ignorance of this rare entity may lead to false diagnoses, such as a malignant epithelial or mesothelial neoplasm, resulting in a more aggressive therapy. Objective: We studied, through a systematic review of the literature, the clinical, radiological, and pathological particularities of Sex cord tumour with annular tubules (SCTAT). Method: Our work has focused on four cases of SCTAT collected at our department with a systematic review of the literature. Results: The average age was 30 years, ranging from 4 to 76 years. It was associated with Peuz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) in 1/3 of cases. The age of our patients ranged from 10 to 32 years. One of our patients had a concomitant diagnosis of PJS. The tumour was unilateral in all cases, and was revealed by precocious puberty in one case. Gross findings, showed a solid tumour, with yellow cut surface. The size ranged from 0,5 to 28 cm. The morphological features were characteristic but intermediate between granulosa and sertoli cells. Immunohistochemistry showed that tumour cells expressed inhibin and claretinin. The treatment was surgical, often conservative. The diagnosis of malignancy wasn't focused on histological features, but on tumour extension, clinical course, and presence of metastases. Conclusion: SCTAT is a rare tumour, usually benign. Its diagnosis is based on histological examination. Malignant potential is noted in sporadic forms. Treatment is most often conservative, based on oophorectomy. Objective: The objective of this study was to evaluated the survival in locally advanced cervical cancer (LACC) with metastatic lymph nodes. To which we considered the size of nodules and their location. Method: From 2006 to 2016, 36 patients with stages IIA-IVA cervical cancer had metastatic adenopathies and were underwent pretherapeutic laparoscopic staging procedure including abdomino-pelvic exploration and pelvic-paraaortic lymphadenectomy. These patients were treated with chemoradiotherapy. Results: The median age was 51.83 years old. Most lesions were squamous (n = 26) having a better prognosis than the ones with adenocarcinoma. Clinical stage was evenly distributed. The pathology results revealed that 12(33.3 %) patients had metastatic paraaortic(PA) lymph nodes and all of them measured were >5 mm. The 24 remaining patients were found to have metastatic pelvic nodes (6 ≤ 5 and 18 > 5 mm). Eventfree survival rates in patients without PA involvement and with PA metastasis were 85,38 %(SE9,68 %) and 46,64 %(SE15,64 %); P < 0,05. With a median follow-up of 23 months (average39.36), 13(36.1 %) patients had recurrent disease and died. Conclusion: Pretherapeutic laparoscopic assessment of patients with LACC offers valuable information for individualized treatment planning. Moreover the survival of patients with PA nodal involvement greater than 5 mm remained poor. More studies are needed including patients with laparoscopic staging surgery without metastatic nodes for future results. Objective: Most uterine carcinosarcoma are monoclonal with the carcinomatous component being the driving force. However, it is also apparent that a small proportion of these neoplasms are true collision tumours, consisting of independent unrelated carcinomas and sarcomas. Method: We presented a case of a 75 year's old woman who came in our institution with vaginal bleeding. An endometrial curettage was performed. Results: On microscopic examination correlated with immunohistochemistry a diagnosis of high grade stromal sarcoma was made. On CT we found a voluminous uterine tumour with both neoplastic ovary and lymph node metastasis on pelvicaorta. Total hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy was performed. On gross examination we observed a well delineated mass, white, with the following dimensions of 10/10/9 cm; bilateral ovarian mass, white-grey, firm consistency with necrotic areas. On microscopic examination we revealed a high-grade uterine stromal sarcoma and bilateral ovarian high-grade serous carcinoma with lymph node carcinomatous metastases. Conclusion: A small proportion of uterine carcinosarcomas are true collision tumours and this is important because the prognosis can sometimes be better than in a similar stage carcinosarcoma. Further investigations are required. Objective: Müllerian adenosarcoma is an uncommon neoplasm of female genital tract composed of a malignant stromal component and a relatively benign glandular element, producing an architecture resembling mammary phyllodes tumour. The pathogenesis of this rare neoplasm however has not yet been well clarified. The purpose of this study is to determine whether dysregulation of Wnt-β-catenin signaling pathway, which plays a critical role in the oncogenesis of mammary phyllodes tumour, has also contribution in the development of this gynecologic neoplasia. Method: Immunohistochemical analysis of stromal β-catenin expression was performed on five Müllerian adenosarcomas of the cervix and three endocervical polyps. The expression was further divided into the membranous, cytoplasmic, or nuclear activity and was graded as a total score 0 to 5 (membranous (negative: 0, positive: 1)), cytoplasmic (negative: 0, focal: 1, diffuse: 2)) and nuclear (negative: 0, <5 % of cells: 1, >5 % of cells: 2)). Results: All cases of adenosarcoma revealed diffuse membranous and cytoplasimic staining and focal nuclear reactivity of β-catenin in the stroma (score 4), comparing to the weaker staining in the endocervical polyps (score 2). Conclusion: The Wnt-β-catenin pathway may be associated with the proliferation of stromal cells in the Müllerian adenosarcomas of the uterine cervix. Objective: Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a common plasma cell dyscrasia, comprising the most indolent form of monoclonal gammopathy. However, approximately 25 % of MGUS cases ultimately progress to plasma cell myeloma (PCM) or related diseases. It is difficult to predict which subset of patients will transform. Based on the fact that the majority of PCMs aberrantly express CD56, in this study we examined its immunophenotypic expression as a prognostic factor in MGUS. Method: A retrospective, descriptive analysis of 42 patients with MGUS, diagnosed between 01/01/2000 and 31/12/2010 was performed, using the expression of the monoclonal antibody anti-CD56 over bone marrow specimens, and analysing 5 years follow-up. Results: Three of the 42 MGUS cases (7.14 %), 2 of 10 (20 %) with CD56 immunoreactivity and 1 of 32 (3.12 %) CD56 immunonegative, showed progression of disease (a progression rate in MGUS with CD56 expression 6.4 times higher). Conclusion: The ability to identify MGUS patients with potential of progression of disease, can offer to this group of patients early treatment options without increasing the morbidity of what is otherwise a relatively indolent entity. A higher relative proportion of CD56+ plasma cells in MGUS may be associated with a higher potential for disease progression. Objective: Erdheim Chester disease is a rare neoplastic histiocytic disorder of adults characterised by the accumulation of foamy macrophages with CD68+, CD1a-, S100-(+), langerin-immunophenotype. Clinical features and organ manifestations are diverse, but skeletal manifestation almost always occur. Current classification of the histiocytic disorders considers it as a member of the Langerhans-related (L) group. Somatic mutations of the MAP Kinase pathway have been described, and may play essential role at the pathogenesis of the disease. Method: Three Erdheim-Chester Disease cases have been diagnosed at our Department between 2013 and 2015. Bone biopsy were performed each cases and lead to diagnosis. Immunohistochemistry panel CD68, S100, CD1a, Langerin have been used, Sanger sequencing have been performed for mutation analysis of BRAF, MAP2K1, NRAS and KRAS genes each case. Results: Two of the cases had BRAFV600E point mutation, the third case harboured another mutation at the MAP Kinase pathway. Conclusion: A few years ago the diagnosis of Erdheim-Chester disease was challenging because of the varying clinical manifestations and lack of special markers, but clinicopathologycal features and molecular methods together may make the diagnose easier and more precise. Objective: Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis is a type of proliferation of CD1a and S100 positive Langerhans cells. Method: Lymphomas, some other malignancies, viral infections, cigarette smoking can cause this stiuation. Results: A 56 years old woman presented with left inguinal lymphadenopathy. Lymph node excision was performed. Microscopically, focal Langerhans cells presented in the lymph node also involved by follicular lymphoma. The presence of langerhans cell proliferations with malignant lymphoma is rare. Today the presence of these cells does not change the treatment. We present the case because of its rarity. Objective: AML can be found after treatment for CLL and is regarded as secondary or therapy-related. However, there are exceptionally rare reports of AML cases concerning patients with untreated CLL or cases with a simultaneous diagnosis of AML and CLL. This case refers to the second category. Method: A 79-year-old male patient presented to the hematological clinic, without any specific symptoms, for the investigation of macrocytic anaemia, an external laboratory finding. A bone marrow biopsy was performed and examined morphologically and immunohistochemically. Results: A mainly nodular and partly interstitial 20 % infiltration by small size neoplastic lymphoid cells with ovoid nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli was observed, with the following immunophenotype: CD20+, CD45RA+, CD79a+, PAX5+, BCL2+, CD5+, CD23+, CD45RO-, CD3-, CD10-, CD38-, CD43-, DBA44-, CCND1-, k-, λ-. Staining with CD34 showed >20 % positive blast cells of myeloid origin. All three marrow cell lineages were dysplastic. Conclusion: The concurrent presence/diagnosis of B-CLL and AML is exceptionally rare, seems to be coincidental and regards two independent clonal neoplastic processes, as shown by cytogenetic and molecular analyses. While arising from two different cellular lines, a common pathogenetic mechanism is rather unlikely. The phenomenon is attributed to a chance coexistence of two uncommon hematologic neoplasms. Objective: Co-existence of T and B cell PTLD are extremely rare but the presence of monoclonal T cell populations in patients with B cell PTLD has been described without features of T cell malignancy. Method: We present one case of metachronous B and T cell PTLD with literature review. Results: 43 years old male transplanted of heart 8 years ago developed generalized lymphadenopathy with a polymorphic PTLD diagnosis, EBV associated and IgH rearrangement. The patient was classified in IVB stage and initially treated with rituximab with no clinical response. The patient starts R-CHOP until partial remission. Two years later of the diagnosis presents a nodular skin lesion with diagnosis of T cell PTLD (CD2+, CD3+, CD8+, CD5-, CD4-) with anaplastic morphology, EBV * Maulana Azad Medical College, Inst. for Head & Neck Surgery, New Delhi, India Objective: Yolk sac tumour also known as endodermal sinus tumour (EST) are malignant germ cell tumours seen in children less than 3 years of age, involving the testis. It is rarely found primarily in extragonadal sites with no involvement of the gonads. Only four cases of temporal bone primary yolk sac tumour have been reported in the literature. Method: Case report: We describe a rare case of extragonadal primary yolk sac tumour of the temporal bone in a 2.5 years old child presenting with a left sided postauricular mass and facial nerve palsy. Results: Biopsy showed reticular areas formed by a loose meshwork lined by flat and cuboidal cells with pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, frequent mitotic figures and vacuolated cytoplasm, with a perivascular organoid arrangement of tumour cells (Schiller-Duval bodies). Immunohistochemistry was strongly positive for AFP with focal expression of pancytokeratin and vimentin, consistent with yolk sac tumour. Patient was treated with chemotherapy including cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin. Conclusion: EST of temporal bone are rare tumours and high degree of suspicion is required to diagnose them. Biopsy of such tumours must be examined by an expert histopathologist to arrive at a diagnosis along with serum alpha protein level to confirm. Objective: Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma (LELC) of the salivary gland is a rare tumour accounting for 0.4 % of all malignant salivary gland tumours. We herein present a rare case of LELC of the parotid gland. Method: A 61 year-old man was diagnosed with a mass in the left parotid gland with no other symptoms or past medical history. Ultrasound revealed hypoechoic, inhomogeneous mass of the parotid gland. Patient underwent surgical removal of the mass by a superficial parotidectomy. Results: Initial frozen sections analysis rendered a diagnosis of malignancy. A complete neck dissection was performed. Histopathologic examination of the specimens revealed a parotid gland with solid carcinomatous sheets, trabeculae and isolated small groups of malignant epithelial cells intermingled with lymphoid stroma. The satellite lymph node showed no infiltration. Immunohistochemical analysis showed neoplastic cells with positive staining for pancytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen and focal expression of LMP1. Lymphoid cells were positive for both CD20 and CD3 markers. On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of stage II, undifferentiated LELC of the parotid gland was made. Conclusion: LELC of the salivary gland is a rare entity with a better prognosis than other poorly differentiated tumours; surgical excision with post-operative radiotherapy is the treatment of choice. Objective: The aim of this report is to describe a rare case of Carcinosarcoma Ex Pleomorphic Adenoma involving the left parotid gland with no history of a long standing Pleomorphic Adenoma, or a Recurrent Pleomorphic Adenoma, and to describe its morphology and important immunohistochemistry findings. Method: The histopathologic findings of the left parotid gland are correlated with the clinical history and ancillary procedures, and surgical pathology staging, including assessment of the draining lymph nodes. Immunohistochemistry studies, assessment of proliferative capacity, and possible treatment target is also done. The tumour is also compared with other reported cases with such diagnosis. Objective: Also known as malignant carcinoid, the atypical laryngeal carcinoma is the most frequent neuroendocrine laryngeal neoplasia. This tumour typically presents as a grey polipoid supraglottic mass, with compressive effects and lymph node metastasis, in male patients, with a median age of 61-years-old. Method: We present the case of a 60-year old male who noticed a neck mass and complained about dysphagia and hoarseness. The patient underwent laryngectomy. Results: We received the 8,5/4,5/5 cm laryngectomy specimen, that contained a 5/4,5/2,5 cm, brownish-grey, polipoid, supraglotic tumour. Histopathological examination revealed an epithelial proliferation, with eosinophilic cells, pleomorphic vesicular nuclei, arranged in trabecules, with mucinous areas, oncocytoid cellular transformation, areas of necros i s a n d h a e m o r r h a g e a n d a m i t o t i c r a t e o f 3 / 1 0 H P F. Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells were positive for CK7, CK34Beta12, CEA, TTF1, Ki67, Chromogranin A and Synaptophysin, confirming the diagnosis of atypical carcinoid of the larynx. Conclusion: Although it has heterogeneous clinical and histopathological aspects, the atypical carcinoid of the larynx may present itself in a typical form, usually confirmed by specific immunohistochemical stains. Objective: There is limited evidence on the effects of prebiotics on morphology of rats oral tissues under II type experimental diabetes mellitus conditions. Method: Diabetes was induced in 42 Wistar rats with the intramuscular injection of the protamine sulfate. Long-term administration of protamine sulfate caused persistent hyperglycemia, reduced glucose tolerance and high insulin resistance. Animals were divided into experimental (1st) and group of comparison (2nd). 1st group of animals was treated with the prebiotic inulin supplementation. Oral tissues and salivary glands samples were examined morphologically, then with the help of computer morphometry. Results: Metabolism disorder due to alloxan-induced hyperglycemia resulted in pathomorphological changes in rat's mucous membrane of cheek, tongue and in minor salivary glands. Inulin treated animals presented with the activation of compensatory-adaptive processes, mucous membranes of cheek and tongue repair, as well as the restoration of the structure of salivary glands. Administration of inulin resulted in a significant decrease of keratinization disorder. Vascular pathology, perivascular edema, macrophage and lymphoid infiltrates had a smaller volume fraction compared with 2nd group. Inulin mediated reduction of a glycemia's level and had the significant antioxidant effect. The beneficial effect on the homeostasis of the oral cavity was also found due to stimulation of bifidum bacteria and lactobacilli growth. Conclusion: Inulin supplementation may improve morphological repair of rats' oral tissues with experimental type 2 diabetes. The prebiotic had proven useful to prevent mucosal inflammatory disorders. Enhanced structural adaptation stimulated the microbiocenosis optimization in the oral cavity. Results: A 52-year-old female, presented with congestion and periorbital pressure which caused blurred vision. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a right sinonasal mass, filling the ethmoid cavity and extended to skull base, periorbitary fat and nasal mucosa. Pathologic examination showed morphologic features similar to those reported for LGSSNM : Moderate to high cellular spindle cell proliferation. The cells had elongated nuclei with coarse chromatin. Some of the cells had nuclear pleomorphisme. The tumour was positive for S100 protein and AML and negative for desmin, CD34, and pankeratin. Ki-67 was assessed at less than 1 % of the spindle cells. A post operative CT scan revealed gross residual tumour, so that the patient received radiotherapy. After 7 months, the patient is disease-free with no signs of recurrence or metastasis. LGSSNM is a recently defined entity that provides a challenge to the managing clinician due to its novelty and to the interpreting pathologist due to its homology with other lesions. Objective: The sinonasal tract is a complex anatomic site, home to a wide variety of lesions. Although inflammatory polyps and papillomas are the most common diagnoses, occasional cases are more difficult, and separating reactive or benign from malignancy can be challenging. We report the case of a seromucinous hamartoma (SH) in a 53-year-old woman. Method: Microscopically, the lesion consisted of a mixed population of small and large glands lined by cuboidal to flattened cells within a hypocellular variable stroma. The glands did not show infiltrative growth or confluent, back to back architecture. The constituent cells were cytologically bland without mitosis and stained positive for CK7, CK19 and HMWK while CK20 was negative. Although P63 staining within the serous glands was negative, S100 showed patchy, weak positivity. Results: The main differential diagnosis for SH is low-grade sinonasal adenocarcinoma, non-intestinal type (LGSNAC), with which they are cytologically and immunohistochemically identical. However, the latter typically has complex growth patterns including micropapillary architecture and glands which are back-to-back or fused. Conclusion: SH is a rare benign lesion of the sinonasal tract. The lack of myoepithelial/basal cells is an important diagnostic feature and could be a diagnostic pitfall leading to an erroneous diagnosis of malignancy. Objective: POF is a reactive gingival overgrowth occuring frequently in the anterior maxilla in teenages and young adults. POF predominatly affects women. It is beliewed to arise from the periodental ligament and comprises of 9 % of all gingival overgrowths. Trauma or irritation have been implicated in the etiology of POF. Due to its clinical and histopathological similarities, some POFs are believed to develop initially as a pyogenic granuloma that undergoes fibrous maturation and subsequent calcification. Method: We present a 13-years-old male patient who has a swelling in the front of upper palate that had gradually increased in size during previous 3 months. Intraoral examination revealed a solitary, pedunculated mass. Intraoral periapical radiograph showed no significant bony changes. An excisional biopsy was done. Results: Histopathologic examination showed fibrocellular connective tissue interspersed with plump fibroblasts in between the collagen bundles, surfaced by stratified squamous epithelium. Stroma also revealed foci of calcification which resembled bone like ossifications. POF was diagnosed. Healing was uneventful and patient is followed up for 3 months without any recurrence. Conclusion: Identification of any reactive lesions (pyogenic granuloma, peripheral giant cell carcinoma, peripheral odontogenic fibroma..) requires the formulation of differential diagnosis to enable proper patient evaluation and management. Objective: Pure oncocytic carcinoma arising from a minor salivary gland is an extremely rare neoplasm with only a few cases reported in literature. Method: We present a case of 56 years old man with enlarged left cervical adenopathies. Fine needle aspiration was done and the smears showed an abundant epithelial cells with well-defined cell borders, round to oval, central to eccentrically located moderately pleomorphic nuclei with fine chromatin, prominent nucleoli and abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm. CT scan showed pathological cervical adenopaties without evidence of primary lesion. Oral cavity examination showed a swelling in oral mucosa localized around the superior left molars. Biopsy was performed. Microscopic examination showed solid sheets, nests, islands and cords of oncocytic cells with severe atypia and numerous figures of mitosis. Immunohistochemical studies were positive for CK 7 and antimitochondrial antibody. Results: The diagnosis of oncocytic carcinoma was made and it was based on clinical, radiological and morphological findings. Surgical excision of the lesion was not performed duo to advanced stage. Conclusion: However oncocytic carcinoma of the minor salivary gland is a very rare tumour, it has to be suspected if morphology and inmmunohistoquimical studies suggest that and antimitochondrial antibody has always to be performed. as 2 cases with intradermal location, previously. We present a distinctive adipocytic mesenchmal tumour with intramucosal location in adult woman. Method: A 60 -year-old woman was presented with an asymptomatic 3 cm diameter slightly elevated nodular lesion on the lower lip mucosa that had occurred for 6 months. The clinical examination was unremarkable. Total excision was performed. Results: Histopathologically, lesion was lobulated and composed of variable proportions of mature adipocytes, bland univacuolated and multivacuolated lipoblasts that extends to the submucosa. There was neither mitotic figure nor necrosis. The tumour involved the surgical margins. The cells showed no staining with mucicarmine, PAS and dPAS. There was negative staining for pan-cytokeratin, smooth muscle actin, PLAG 1 and positive expression for vimentin and S-100. The 9 months of fallow-up revealed no recurrence. Conclusion: To our knowledge, the present case is the first report of the lipoblastoma-like tumour with intramucosal location of the lip. Objective: To present a retrospective study of 32 years of the experience of our institution with respect salivary gland tumours. Method: A retrospective and descriptive study was desgined. Demographic and histopathologic variables were analyzed. Data was retrieved from the department patient's database and hospital clinical records. Results: Over a 32-year period, a total of 237 major and minor salivary gland tumours were identified. Benign tumours represented 120 (50.6 %) and malignant tumours 117 (49.3 %). The mean age of diagnosis for benign lesions was 40 years and for malignant lesions was 47 years. The most common site affected was the parotid gland for both groups. The most frequent benign tumour was pleomorphic adenoma in 90 (75.0 %) cases, Warthin's tumour in 16 (13.3 %) cases, followed by myoepithelioma and oncocytic tumours in 3 (2.5 %) cases. The most frequent malignant neoplasia identified were mucoepidermoid carcinoma in 29 (24.7 %) cases, adenoid cystic carcinoma in 15 (12.8 %) cases and lymphoma in 13 (11.1 %) cases. Only 9 (3.79 %) cases corresponded to the pediatric population (less than 15 year-old). Conclusion: Pleomorphic adenoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma were the most frequent benign and malignant tumours respectively. The data presented is similar to reports in other centers. Objective: A minority of meningiomas can occur in extracranial locations, the head and neck region being most frequently involved. Method: We report a case of extracranial meningioma in a 71 year old female, presenting as tumefaction in the left parietal region. Ultrasound examination revealed a tumour developing under the epicranial aponeurosis, with an underlying area of bone lysiss. The tumour's vascular pedicle originated from the intracranial space. There was no history of trauma. Total tumour removal followed by cranial reconstruction was performed in the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Results: Macroscopic examination showed a 5/5/2 cm whitish nodule, with elastic consistency, infiltrating the underlying skull fragment in an area of 2/1.5 cm. No tumour was visible on the inner part of dura mater. Light microscopic examination revealed an encapsulated lesion composed of spindle cells arranged in whirls. They infiltrated the entire thickness of the bone, but were limited to the outer layer of the dura. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for vimentin and EMA and negative for SMA, S100, CD34 and PR. Conclusion: The identification of the intracranial blood supply could explain this tumours main extracranial mass as arachnoid cells can be found in the sheaths of vessels that emerge through the skull foramina. Objective: Primary tracheal tumours are rare in adults and usually malignant. Only 10 % of them are benign. Hamartomata are tumour-like malformations in which occurs only abnormal mixing of the normal components of the organ. They frequently localized in lung parenchyma and rarely only in trachea. We report a case of a 69-year-old man with a 4-year history of progressive breathlessness. MRI revealed a well-circumscribed dilobe, polypoid mass in the upper third of the tracheal lumen. The lesion was obliterating the tracheal lumen by 40 % and bronchoscopy was performed. Method: We received a grayish, solid, elastic tumour measuring 2 × 1 × 0.6 cm. Results: Microscopically we observed the mucosa with respiratory and focal squamous epithelium and in submucosa a well-defined tumour with plenty, slightly abnormal vessels with size variety in a myxoid fibrous tissue. There were also adult fat tissue, groups of mucous secreting glands, cartilage and chronic inflammatory cells. There was no cytological atypia and a diagnosis of tracheal hamartoma was made. Conclusion: Benign tumours of trachea grow slowly and they don't have the potential to become malignant. However, based on its localization, they can even cause death due to airway obstruction. For this reason, early diagnosis is crucial. pleomorphic adenoma cases, 167 (70.7 %) out of 236 cases. Of the 82 malignant tumours, Adenoid cystic carcinoma 31 cases (37.8 %) was the most common salivary gland malignant neoplastic lesion followed by mucoepidermoid carcinoma 27 cases (32.9 %). Submandibular gland was the most common site in adenoid cystic carcinoma while parotid gland involved in majority of mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Conclusion: Chronic sialadenitis was the most common non-neoplastic lesion, pleomorphic adenoma was the most common benign lesion and adenoid cystic carcinoma (followed by mucoepidermoid carcinoma) was the most common malignant lesion. Objective: Osteosarcomas are the most common tumours of the bone, a heterogenous group of primary malignant neoplasms affecting bones or mesenchymal tissues that ahve histopathologic evidence of osteoid production. We present a rare case of high grade chondroblastic osteosarcoma of the maxillary bone. Method: A 28-year-old, woman in fourth month of pregnacy was admitted to Surgery Department, for the evaluation of the newly diagnosed and rapidly growing mass of the upper jaw. Clinical examination revealed a significant swelling of the left cheek. Intraoral examination revealed a mass that was palpatory hard in consistence and was bleeding focaly. MRI examination showed a poorly defined tumour with indistinct margin. Patient underwent surgery. Frozen section revealed a malignant chondroid tumour suspected on chondrosarcoma. Macroscopically, tumour was fragmented, grayish in colour, hard in consistence. Results: Histology showed malignant neoplasm of mesenchymal origin which was consist of malignant appearing cartilage with peripheral spindling and osteoid production. High grade tomor component showed high mitotic rate. Immunochistochemically tumour cells showed S100, Vimentin, and focally Podoplanin positivity. The diagnosis was consistent with chondorblastic osteosarcoma, high grade. Conclusion: Postoperative course has been regular without unexpected adverse events. Osteosarcoma is a highly malignant bone tumour and it is a relatively a rare disease in the head and neck region. It occurs infrequently in the jaws where they have a better prognosis. Objective: Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the external auditory ear canal are extremely rare. They can clinically mimic granulation tissue and mistaken for inflammation. Method: A 46-year old male presented with progressive right ear blockage, associated with excessive ear digging. There was evidence of bleeding and on examination appeared like granulation tissue. A provisional diagnosis of right traumatic ear canal polyps was made. Excised specimen consisted of multiple bits of greyish brown tissue, measuring 10 mm in aggregate diameter. Entire specimen was submitted for analysis. Sections were stained with routine H&E and later with a panel of IHC markers, comprising pan keratin AE1/AE3, S-100, p63 and CD117. Results: Histology exhibited both cribriform and tubular pattern of adenoid cystic carcinoma component. IHC studies further confirmed the nature of the lesion. The epithelial cells were strongly positive for AE1/ AE3 and the myoepithelial cells showed patchy expression for S-100. p63 highlighted the prominent myoepithelial cells. CD117 showed strong positivity for the tumour element. Conclusion: Adenoid cystic carcinoma should be considered in the differential diagnoses of all external auditory malignant lesions by both pathologists and surgeons alike. Apart from conventional squamous cell carcinoma and ulcerating melanoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma can present as traumatic appearing pseudo polyps. Four cases of mandibular calcifying cystic odontogenic tumour B. Senguven * , B. Mohamed Aznad, E. Baris * Gazi University, Dept. of Oral Pathology, Ankara, Turkey Objective: Calcifying odontogenic cyst or Gorlin cyst, was first described by Gorlin et al. in 1962 . The World Health Organization classified it as calcifying cystic odontogenic tumour in 2005. It's a benign, uncommon neoplasm, represents less than 2 % of all odontogenic tumours. Calcifying cystic odontogenic tumour has a unique structure: a solid lesion with a cystic formation that's why it has a variable clinical behaviour; cystic, neoplastic or infiltrating malignant behavior. Malign transformation to ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma is very rare. It can be extraosseous or intraosseous. Histologically calcifying cystic odontogenic tumour consists of ameloblastoma -like strands, islands of odontogenic epithelium and ghost cells in a mature connective tissue stroma. Odontoma may accompany this lesion, also the lesion may be multilobulated. Conclusion: This review consisting of four cases of calcifying cystic odontogenic tumour. All of them were from male patients, the age ranging from 50 to 70 years old. The clinical location of one lesion was mandibulary anterior and the other cases were in mandibulary posterior area. Only one lesion showed multilobular radiographic features. Objective: Defining the histologic features of microcystic acinic cell carcinoma of the salivary glands (MACC) and discussing its main differential diagnoses. Results: A 60-old-year woman with no medical history presented with painful right submandibular swelling lasting for many years. On cervical ultrasound it corresponded to a hypoechoic lymph nodes. FNA cytology concluded to a salivary gland tumour that couldn't be typed. Frozen section examination concluded to a malignat salivary tomor. Further microscopic examination of the paraffin embedded tissue showed a tumour composed of sheets and microcysts. Tumour cells had a clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm. There were areas of mucosecretion. P 63 staining was negative. We concluded to a MACC. Conclusion: MACC has many overlapping features with mucoepidermoid carcinoma of salivary gland. P63 immunohistochemical staining can be useful in the differential diagnosis. Objective: Hyalinizing clear cell adenocarcinoma (HCAC) of the salivary glands is a rare and low-grade malignant tumour which lacks features of other specific tumours that have predominant clear cell population. We present a hyalinizing clear cell adenocarcinoma of salivary gland in an unusual localization. A 45 year old man was presented with an ulcerated maxillary gingival mass with the duration of 3 months. The clinical examination was unremarkable. Total excision was performed. Results: Histopathologically, lesion was characterized by nests of glycogen-rich monomorphic clear cells within a hyaline stroma. Tumour cells were positive with pan-cytokeratin, cytokeratin-7 and revealed low proliferative index for Ki-67. Conclusion: Since, HCCC has a better prognosis and the adequate treatment is wide excision, it should to be differentiated from other clear cells carcinomas. No further therapy was given to the patient. Ten months after the surgery, the patient is symptom free without local recurrence and on regular follow up. Objective: Benign tumours of the palatine tonsil are estimated to 25 % of all neoplasms of the tonsil. Among these benign tumours most of them are squamous papillomas or lymphangiomas. Histologically, the normal tonsillar framework is usually devoid of adipocytes. That may explain the fact that adipocytic tumours are rare in this tissue. We present a rare case of a fibrolipoma of the palatine tonsil. Method: A 25 years old man presented with a foreign body sensation in the throat. Clinical examination revealed a polypoid smooth yellowish mass arising from the right tonsil. The patient underwent a bilateral tonsillectomy and the resected specimen was addressed for a pathological examination. Macroscopic analysis found a lobular yellowish mass measuring 1.5 × 1 × 0.7 cm arising from the right tonsil. Results: Microscopy showed tonsillar tissue with a polypoid lesion composed of mature adipose tissue surrounded with strands of fibrous tissue. The mass was covered of non-keratinised stratified squamous epithelium. Conclusion: Fibrolipoma is a benign, slow-growing neoplasm composed of an abnormal collection of mature adipose cells with prominent bundles of mature fibrous tissue traversing fatty lobules. They usually occur in subcutaneous tissues but rarely in the aerodigestive tract especially palatine tonsil. Objective: To report an unusual case of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) misdiagnosed as an odontogenic infection. Method: Using a retrospective study design, we analysed the patient file and pathological data. Results: A healthy 44-year-old Caucasian man presented with multiple dental caries and swelling of the left mandible for a month. There was neither any discomfort nor B-symptoms except lymphocytosis. An initial diagnosis with the first histopathological confirmation was buccal cellulitis. However, the patient had no response to antibiotic and surgical treatments. The second histopathological findings demonstrate diffuse, monotonous proliferation of large, round cells. The immunohistochemical analysis revealed positivity to CD20, BCL-2, CD10, negativity to cyclin-D1, TdT and CD3 and no chromosomal change of BCL-2 and BCL-6 genes. Ki-67 reactivity was 90 %. The diagnosis of DLBCL-Stage IE was made. An MRI demonstrated a 3.8 × 3.1-cm mass involving peri-and paramandibular and parapharyngeal spaces with osteolytic area of the mandible. The patient was opted to 6 cycles of CHOP-R-14. Conclusion: Oral lymphomas are very rare, especially those present as a swelling in patients with poor oral hygiene. Maxillofacial/head and neck surgeons should be aware of this uncommon condition. We also review the clinicopathological aspects of the oral DLBCL. Objective: Describe the pathological characteristics of acinar cell carcinoma of the parotid gland. Method: We report the case of a 64-year-old female patient who presented with a parotid mass whose characteristics were clinically and radiologically suspected. The patient had an enlarged lumpectomy. We proceeded to a frozen section, then the tumour was embedded in formalin 10 %. Afterwards, we performed parafin sections and colored them with hematoxilin eosine. Results: Frozen section concluded to a benign lesion. However, the definitive examination showed a malignant epithelial proliferation often organized in full spans. Tumour cells line glandular lights or wider cavities. They are large and have round or polyhedral shape with granular cytoplasm. The nuclei are round and concentric. Cytoplasmic granules are PAS positive. The diagnosis of acinar cell carcinoma of the parotid gland was retained. Conclusion: The acinar cell carcinoma is a rare malignant tumour of the parotid gland. Histologically, the tumour is characterized by serous acinar cells. It has a recurrence rate of 35 % with a risk of metastases of 16 %. Objective: Describe the pathological characteristics of the carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma of the parotid gland. Method: We report the case of a 55-year-old woman who presented with a huge swelling of the parotid region evolving for a year. Physical examinaton and MRI were in favor of malignancy. The patient underwent a lumpectomy and lymph node dissection. The samples were embedded in formalin 10 %, then we performed parafin sections and colored them with hematoxilin eosine. Results: By microscopic examination, there was an invasive tumour consisting of malignant epithelial proliferation and benign myoepithelial proliferation within a fibromyxoid stroma. Malignant epithelial proliferation was composed of large round cells with abundant cytoplasm. They exhibit large nuclei that are often vesicular, with nucleoli and sometimes mitotic. The tumour cells form clusters sometimes centered by horny globes. These clusters are surrounded by regular myoepithelial cells. Lymph node dissection was negative and the resection limits were unscathed. The diagnosis of carcinoma was retained. Conclusion: Carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma is a type of malignant mixed tumour of the parotid gland. It results from the malignant transformation of a preexisting pleomorphic adenoma. Its prognosis is dominated by the capsular invasion and histological grade. E-PS-10-001 History of pathology F. Hosseini Gharalari * * Urmia University of Medical Science, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Iran Objective: Regarding my extreme enthusiasm in pathology, I decided to arrange a search to obtain the most important and beautiful events which helped to improve this fascinating type of science. Method: Sites, books and articles related to pathology were searched and interesting parts were selected. Then they were arranged by time order and suitable photos attached. Results: The results of this study were more than interesting to me, especially in the fields of frozen section, cytopathology and molecular pathology. Conclusion: We can learn from our ancestors how to think, to do research and how to try so much to reach advances in our careers. Objective: Finding of Trichinella spiralis in two patients with neoplasia rise an alert in Argentina to adopt preventive measures, since prevalence is unknown due to lack of mandatory obligatory communication. Method: Patient I: 61 years old female with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Patient II: 54 years old female with invasive ductal carcinoma. Quadrantectomy and breast reconstruction with muscle flap was performed. Due to intercurrent infections the flap was removed and submitted to pathological study. Results: Patient I: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma diagnosis was confirmed. Trichinella Spiralis larvae in pre laryngeal muscle was detected as a casual finding. The patient died 15 months after the trichinellosis diagnosis without parasitic treatment. There were no parasitism family history. Patient II: Trichinella Spiralis larvae was detected in the myocutaneous flap. Anti-parasitic treatment was contraindicated by the oncologist and the patient is asymptomatic after 2 years evolution. Breast cancer is in progression. Conclusion: Pork consumption non submitted to official surveillance should be avoided and penalized. It is necessary to remark the importance of mandatory communication of illegal slaughter to eradicate the disease. Objective: Dirofilaria, is a nematode parasite that is spread through mosquito bites. The definite host is the dog. Rarely humans may be infected but since they are not a suitable environment for the nematode, the worm first inhabits cutaneous tissues, then migrates to the right heart ventricle where it eventually dies. Fragments of the worm may reach the pulmonary arteries and lodge in a small calibre vessel to cause infarction or embolism that can be clinically silent or associated with chest pain, fever and haemoptysis. Method: A 58-year-old woman presented with chest pain. Imaging studies revealed a solitary nodule at the inferior lobe of the left lung that was surgically removed. Results: Upon gross examination the nodule appeared well circumscribed. Microscopically the central necrotic area was enclosed by a zone of granulomatous inflammation within a dense fibrous capsule. Masson trichrome, Elastica and Reticulin revealed the vessel wall as well as the prominent muscular lateral cords and the bilateral internal cuticular ridges of the worm which assumed a characteristic "bat wing" appearance Conclusion: Dirofilaria is a parasite that rarely affects humans and may clinically resemble a malignancy. A definitive diagnosis of dirofilaria species can be achieved by tissue biopsy for histopathology and molecular testing. E-PS-11-004 Sarcina ventriculi: A case report of a rarely seen organism and discussion of its significance C. Guy * , I. Woodman, T. Sorkin, O. McKinney, J. Boissiere * King's College Hospital, Dept. of Histopathology, London, United Kingdom Objective: Sarcina ventriculi is a gram positive giant cocci that was discovered by J. Goodsir in 1842 and described in his paper published in the Edinburgh Medical Surgery Journal. Further reports have since been made in medical and veterinary literature. Sarcina is most commonly found in the stomach and is often associated with gastric outflow obstruction. Its appearance is distinctive and identification can be made on routine H&E staining. We present a case in which the presence of Sarcina was noted in a gastric biopsy, review the current literature, and discuss the significance of this organism. Method: We present a case of a 48 year-old gentleman who presented with vomiting. A CT scan showed gastric thickening and an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed. This revealed erythematous gastric mucosa and food residue. Biopsies were taken and histology showed a granulomatous gastritis. In addition, Sarcina-like organisms were seen. Special stains for micro-organisms (Ziehl Neelsen and PASD) were negative. Results: Review of the literature shows that it remains unclear if Sarcina is pathogenic or simply more likely to be identified in cases of gastroparesis or gastric outflow obstruction. In a series of five patients where Sarcina was identified in gastric biopsies, the presence of a concurrent gastric ulcer may put the patient at increased risk of complications such as emphysematous gastritis or perforation. Conclusion: The literature suggests that the presence of Sarcina organisms should prompt further investigation for functional causes of gastric outlet obstruction and delayed gastric emptying, such as occult malignancy. Other authors recommend treatment with antibiotics and anti-ulcer therapy in such cases. Results: Clinical History: A 19 year-old female presented with throat pain and fever. A Monospot test was positive. She deteriorated progressively in 3 days with increasing throat pain, worsening fever and dyspnea. She was hospitalized and on the second day of admission was found in cardiorespiratory arrest. She was resuscitated successfully. Chest X-rays revealed possible ARDS. She coded three more times in a period of 6 h and died. Histopathology: Cervical acute lymphadenitis, necrotizing tonsillitis, Diffuse Alveolar Damage (DAD) and acute interstitial pneumonitis, acute splenitis and superficial splenic tear, acute hepatitis and severe hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Post-mortem laboratory tests: Elevated EBV Ab VCA IgG and IgM. Real-time PCR: 4.65 × 10^6 EBV copies/ml. Ferritin: >10,000 ng/ml (ref: 18-464 ng/ml). Pre-and Post-mortem cytokine serum levels (Human Cytokine 27-plex): The following showed marked elevation between pre-and postmortem serum samples: IL-1 beta; IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, IL-15, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFN-gamma, CXCL10, CCL2, and TNF-alpha. Conclusion: AIM is a very common infectious disease worldwide that affects children and adolescents. In very rare cases, the disease is fatal due to splenic rupture, encephalitis, DIC and severe HLH. In this case we were able to demonstrate diffuse alveolar damage and severe HLH which ultimately led to the patient's demise. Viral load was extremely high and the cytokine pattern was that of a "cytokine storm" leading to increased microvascular permeability, DAD, and HLH. Objective: Morphological diagnostics of tuberculosis in immunosupressed patients may be extremely difficult due to unusual histopathological picture and appearance of acid resistant rods. Method: Autopsy data of a patient X, 80 yearss old, suffering from chronic lymphocytic leukemia Rfi stage 0/BinetA with isolated deletion of 13q is presented in comparison of clinical, bacteriological, PCR data made during life time with morphological changes, including Ziehl-Nielsen staining. Results: For 4 years she was suffering from chronic leukemia, within last 6 months was suspected tuberculosis. According recent clinical and X-Ray data patient had infiltrative tuberculosis with formation of the cavities with detection of M. tuberculosis in culture and PCR. On autopsy were seen only fungal lesions of trachea, bronchi mucous membranes and suspicious foci in lung tissue. During the routine histopathology were detected numerous fungal filaments probably Aspergillus) and foci with sclerosis. In Ziehl-Nielsen staining typical acid resistant rods were found practically in all fields of view. We considered as the most expressive the localization of the rods just upon fungus. Conclusion: 1) In immunosuppressive patient typical macro-and histological picture of tuberculosis may be absent. 2) Mycobacteria tuberculosis can be localized on the surface of fungi. Parasitic infection presenting as an unusual soft tissue tumour in a 2 year old child R. Dela Cruz * , E. Paulino-Cabrera * Philippine Children's Med. Center, Dept. of Pathology, Quezon City, Philippines Objective: In pediatric patients a malignancy is often the primary consideration when presented with a soft tissue tumour accompanied by weight loss. While sarcomas are common in this age group, nonneoplastic or infectious causes should also be considered. Our aim is to cause awareness that parasitic infections can present as aggressive soft tissue tumours. Method: We present a case of a 2 year old female with weight loss and a gradually enlarging mass initially involving the vulva and extending to the abdomen, thigh, retroperitoneum, urinary bladder and ureter. The admitting impression was Rhabdomyosarcoma versus Lymphovascular Malformation. Histopathology specimen, complete work-up for malignancy, special stains and serum serology were done. Results: Skeletal survey, bone marrow biopsy, serum alphafetoprotein and Beta-Human Chorionic Gonadotrophin were negative. Incision biopsy showed non-caseating granulomatous inflammation with giant cell formation and fibrosis. Gram stain, blood culture, tissue Acid Fast Bacilli, Galactomannan and Nitroblue Tetrazolium test were all negative. Serum enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for Strongyloides and Toxocara canis were positive. Conclusion: Visceral larval infection can manifest as aggressive soft tissue tumours and should be included in the differential diagnosis. Serum EIA is useful to detect the causative agent when histology does not reveal the pathogen due to tissue reaction and degenerative changes. Objective: Strongyloidiasis is an infectious disease caused by Strongyloides stercoralis. Disseminated form is associated with severe immunosuppression. It usually mimics severe sepsis and is challenging regarding diagnosis and treatment. Diagnosis depends on clinical suspicion and demonstration of the larvae on fluid or tissue. Cutaneous evolvement is rare. Method: A 53-year-old men, HTLV-1 positive, presented with severe sepsis and neutrophilic leukocytosis without eosinophilia. Clinical suspicion was made because of a previous history of strongyloidiasis, vomiting, abdominal pain, hiporexia and maculous, brownish serpiginous abdominal skin lesions. Results: Histology revealed Strongyloides stercoralis in faeces parasitological exam. Larvae were seen among collagen fibers in skin biopsy, together with scant perivascular lymphoid cells and extravased erythrocytes. Larvae were also seen in duodenal biopsies and broncoalveolar and gastric smears. Conclusion: The diagnosis of disseminated strongyloidiasis is based on the finding of larvae in different parts of the body, particularly faeces, gastric and tracheal secretions, bronchial, skin, lung and jejunal biopsies. Strongyloidiasis may cause life threatening infection. Regarding our patient, clinical improvement occurred after 21 days of subcutaneous Ivermectin and the last parasitological exam was negative. Necrotizing fasciitis associated with injection drug use with fatal outcome: Report of two autopsy cases I. Aleksic * , J. Dzambas, N. Marinkovic * Military Medical Academy, Inst. of Pathology, Kragujevac, Serbia Objective: Necrotizing fasciitis (NF) is rare progressive infectious disease of fascia, subcutaneous fat and muscles, that may be fatal for intravenous drug abusers. We report two autopsy cases of NF in intravenous drug abusers. Method: 36-year-old man was found dead in his house and the other 23year-old man died in the hospital. Autopsies of both corps with histopathological examination were performed at the Institute of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Military Medical Academy, Belgrade. Results: Edematous and gagrenous skin with injection signs in left inguinal region of older and right tight of younger man were externally examined. Both men had purulent inflammation of subcutaneous fat, fascia and muscle. Older man had gross myocarditis and younger had pneumonia signs. Histopahologically both men had moderate mixed, predominantly neutrophilic, inflammation in subcutaneous fat, fascia and around myocytes, with scant lymphocytes and plasmacytes and moderate necrosis. The same type of inflammation and fibrosis were found in myocard of older, and in lungs, kidneys end periportal liver spaces in younger man. Conclusion: Necrotizing fasciitis usually occurs in middle age men, intravenous drug abusers and may cause death by spreading the infection to surrounding tissues and organs leading to sepsis. Spinal echinococcosis: A case report A. Sapargaliyeva * , A. Pak, R. Dostarbayev, A. Duisenova * Kazakh National Medical University, Dept. of Pathology, Almaty, Kazakhstan Objective: Spinal echinococcosis is a rare condition. Due to the lack of clinical suspicion of spine lesions in case of parasitic diseases, doctors face serious difficulties in diagnosing this condition before surgery. Method: The 30-year old patient was operated at the orthopaedics department of the National Centre for Tuberculosis Control with a clinical diagnosis of active stage of tuberculous spondylitis (L1-2-3 vertebrae) with destruction of vertebral bodies. The condition of the patient was complicated by abscess. The patient complained of increasing back pain during the movement (and pain medication decreased the pain), fatigue and weight loss (5 kg during 5-month period), and he noted a deterioration of his condition within the last 4 months. The patient received treatment with anti-TB drugs, which did not have any effect but aggravated his physical condition. The patient received a routine examination, including CT, that allowed to identify destruction of multiple vertebral bodies (L1-2-3) and paravertebral abscess. Results: The patient had right-sided lumbotomy, a surgery to drain paravertebral abscess, necroectomy of vertebral bodies (L1-2-3). During the surgery, multiple cysts containing fluid and bone fragments were removed. Histological examination revealed bone grafts with signs of destruction and cystic structures with inner germinal layer. Conclusion: Our case demonstrates the problem in the diagnosis of spinal echinococcosis in clinical practice. Despite significant post-surgery improvement in the condition of the patient (absence of pain, the patient is able to walk independently), the presence of cystic structures with inner germinal layer creates a high probability of further contamination. Objective: The rarity of anorectal tuberculosis can lead to misdiagnosis of Crohn's disease or foreign body granuloma by unexperienced pathologist. In order to raise awareness of tuberculosis, we present a challenging case from high-incidence population (38.0/100 000). Method: Medical documentation and pathology slides were reviewed in the context of up-to-date medical literature. Results: A 44-year-old male complained about anal pain and bloody discharge for preceding 6 months. Haemorrhoids and chronic anal fissure were suspected clinically and excised. By pathology, foreign body granulomas were reported. A year later, patient experienced clinically recurrent anorectal symptoms; perirectal inflammation and bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy by computed tomography; leukocytosis and high level of C-reactive protein. Despite antibacterial/antimycotic treatment, symptoms relapsed again 4 months later. Reevaluation of previous tissue material disclosed caseating granulomas with multinucleated giant and epitheloid cells surrounded by lymphocytes and fibrous tissue. Thus, anorectal tuberculosis was diagnosed. The following evaluation revealed pulmonary tuberculosis, history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection for 15 years and presence of multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum and anorectal tissue. Conclusion: Tuberculosis can affect anorectal soft tissues mimicking haemorroids. The historic paradigm of careful search for caseous necrosis in granulomas still can disclose clinically challenging extrapulmonary tuberculosis, especially in high-incidence regions and HIV-infected patients. E-PS-11-013 Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy diagnosis of disseminated histoplasmosis in retroviral positive patient T. Pasupati Meenakshi * * Clinipath Pathology, Histopathology, Puchong, Malaysia Objective: Endoscopic Ultrasound-Guided Fine Needle Aspiration Biopsy is a challenging field in cytology, carried out in specialized centres, and needs careful examination on limited material to make an accurate diagnosis. It is commonly practiced to diagnose both malignant and granulomatous lesions, rarely for suspected infective aetiology. Method: A 23-year-old retroviral positive male presented with diarrhoea and abdominal pain. CT scan revealed multiple, enlarged intraabdominal lymph nodes. A provisional diagnosis of lymphoma was made and EUS-FNA biopsy was carried out. A grayish brown fragment of 1 mm was received and processed in microwave tissue processor. Results: Histology showed mostly fibrinous material, with one localized fragment of lymphoid tissue exhibiting closely packed, diffusely distributed, yeast-like organisms measuring 2 to 4 μm in size. Similar yeast like organisms were seen in the surrounding fibrinous element, distributed in a loose fashion. The organisms were strongly positive for PAS special stain. Features of disseminated histoplasmosis involving abdominal lymph nodes were confirmed. Conclusion: The diagnosis of histoplasmosis or other opportunistic infections on EUS-FNA biopsy material can be very challenging, but rewarding at the same time. Clinical correlation with histology findings is a necessity on all challenging cases of EUS-FNA. Objective: Amebiasis is seen worldwide and is more prevalent in tropical regions. Incidence of amebiasis in Tunisia is 6 cases per year. The most frequent extraintestinal manifestation of amebiasis is liver abscess. Method: We report a case of a 47-year-old woman who presented with a 6-month-history of pelvic pain and heaviness. Results: Examination revealed a latero-uterine mass. Imagery based on ultrasound examination and CT scan found an ovarian suspicious malignant mass with ascites. Patient had hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, appendicectomy and omentectomy. Gross examination showed an ovary replaced by a 8x6cm mass of grayish-white nodular tissue. Histologic evaluation showed an intense inflammatory infiltrate, mainly composed of neutrophils, lymphocytes and histiocytes. Actinomycotic granules were seen as basophilic filaments radially arranged, In addition, we discovered numerous amebas among the inflammatory infiltrate and necrosis. Theses findings were consisting with an ovarian actinomycosis and amebiasis. The patient received specific antibiotherapy with a good clinical evolution. Conclusion: Although ovarian actinomycosis is commonly seen, ovarian amebiasis has never been reported in literature. therapy are available treatment options. Radiotherapy is an effective and non-invasive treatment that improves patient's quality of life. Conclusion: The presence of acrometastasis in patients with cancer helps staging the disease and usually indicates a very poor prognosis. Necrotizing acute pancreatitis following trans-arterial chemoembolization of liver metastasis from rectal cancer using irinotecan beads: An autopsy case J. Lobo * , F. Menezes, M. Jácome * Porto, Portugal Objective: To present a case of necrotizing acute pancreatitis (NAP) that resulted in patient's death after being submitted to trans-arterial chemoembolization (TACE) of liver metastasis (LM) from rectal cancer (RC), followed by a review of the Revised Atlanta Classification of acute pancreatitis. Method: A 72 year-old man with RC submitted to surgery and chemotherapy was diagnosed with a LM deemed unresectable and underwent TACE. The patient died less than 48 h after the procedure and the autopsy was performed. Results: External examination showed Cullen's sign on the abdominal wall. Internal examination revealed extensive cystosteatonecrosis. The pancreas and peripancreatic tissues exhibited hemorrhagic necrosis and the liver showed a 4 × 3 cm nodule. On histological examination we observed numerous vessels occluded by reddish microspheres (Irinotecan beads) on multiple sites, including pancreas, liver, biliary tract, soft tissue and retroperitoneal lymph nodes. The terminal accident was a sterile NAP (of both pancreatic and peripancreatic tissues) of embolic cause and the fundamental disease was a LM which was partially necrotic. Conclusion: NAP is a described complication of TACE and presumably occurs due to regurgitation of embolic material, which can occur only after the procedure. NAP should be kept in mind even when TACE is thought to have been safely performed. Objective: Spontaneous regression of cancer consists in the complete disappearance or partial shrinkage of a malignant neoplasm without appropriate treatment. It is an extremely rare event, apparently more common for renal cell carcinoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma and leukaemia, neuroblastoma and melanoma. Method: A 51 years old woman underwent left colectomy for treatment of an adenocarcinoma (staged pT3N1M0), followed by adjuvant chemotherapy (twelve FOLFIRI cycles). Six years later two hepatic nodes, suggestive of metastases, were diagnosed by abdominal CT and MRI exams. Before the number and resectability of the hepatic lesions, the patient underwent a right hepatectomy. Results: No complications occurred in the postoperative period, and the patient was discharged on 7th post-operative day. The pathological examination revealed two metastatic nodules, completely necrotic, with no viable tumour. The patient was submitted to adjuvant chemotherapy (FOLFIRI) and is currently in her 10th post-operative month, free of disease. Conclusion: The authors report an exceedingly rare case of spontaneous regression of colorectal liver metastases. There are only 21 cases of spontaneous regression of colorectal cancer accounted for in the literature from 1900 up to 2005, nine of which relate to remission of liver metastases. The physiopathological mechanisms behind spontaneous regression are yet to be fully understood. E-PS-13-008 Pathologic characteristics of resected hepatocellular carcinomas Z. Nurkabul * , E. Turkmen Samdanci, N. E. Aydin, A. N. Akatli, N. Sahin, A. F. Dagli, E. Cakir, S. Yilmaz * Inonu University, Pathology, Malatya, Turkey Objective: Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most common primary malignancy of the liver. The relation between the factors affecting the etiopathogenesis (viral hepatitis, alcohol, metabolic disorders, etc.) of hepatocellular carcinoma and microscopic pattern of tumour, differentiation, lymphovascular invasion, and prognostic parameters was investigated in this study. Method: Eighty two cases that underwent resection for hepatocellular carcinoma between 2005 and 2010 were evaluated retrospectively. Results: Average age of the cases was 53.47. Of the cases, 89 % (n = 73) were male and 11 % (n = 9) were female. The mean tumour diameter was 4.5 cm. Viral infection was the most important cause of hepatocellular carcinoma at a rate of 85 %, including viral hepatitis B, C, D and HIV. While in 91.5 % of the cases (n = 75) cirrhosis was observed in addition to tumour, %37.5 (n = 24) were established to have dysplastic nodules. Large portal vein or hepatic vein invasion was present in 23.1 % (n = 19) of the cases. Conclusion: Viral etiology for hepatocellular carcinoma (predominantly Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C virus) is still the most significant risk factor in our region. Objective: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas(PDAC) are difficult to diagnose, and do not have any specific immunohistochemical staining pattern . MUC expressions in PDAC can provide prominent clues to predict the prognosis. Evaluation of the relationship between MUC expressions, and survival in our cases is aimed in this study. Method: 54 PDACs resected between 2012 and 16 were stained with CK7, CK20, MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6, and CDX2; and examined by 4 blind researchers under a multi-headed microscope. Diffusion and density of staining was scored as 0-3 using a certain scoring system. Histopathologic prognostic parameters were obtained from pathology reports. Survival informations retrieved from "National Death Information System". Datas were evaluated by "Spss Statistics Programme". Results: F/M ratio was 2/3; and mean age was 65. 43 % was alive, while 53 % was dead. Mean survival was 16 months. MUC1 staining was correlated with lymph node metastasis (p = 0,009). MUC5 density was correlated with lymphatic invasion (p = 0,01). Widespread of MUC6 was correlated with grade (p = 0,008), and survival (P = 0,047). Conclusion: MUC1, MUC5 and MUC6 stains might be useful to predict the risk of lymph node metastasis, grade, and survival of PDACs. The use of special stains in liver biopsy interpretation: Implications for the tropics N. Orah * , F. Abdulkareem, O. Rotimi * Lagos University Teaching Hospital, Dept. of Anatomic and Molecular Pathology, Idi Araba, Nigeria Objective: This study aims to re-evaluate a set of liver biopsies which has been diagnosed solely on H&E stains by performing a standard set of special stains on them. Method: The formalin fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) blocks of liver biopsies reported in two histopathology laboratories between 2008 and 2013 were retrieved. These were stained with H&E and the following standard special stains for liver tissue histology-Perl's Prussian Blue, Reticulin, Sirius Red, Shikata Orcein and PAS with Diastase. The stained slides were re analysed. Results: 74 liver biopsy paraffin blocks were received in the laboratories. 53 (71.6 %) were suitable for analysis out of which 51 (68.9 %) had their clinical details retrievable. In 29 cases (56.9 %), Perl's stain was positive for iron pigment within the hepatocytes with 17 (58.6 %) of these being Grade 1; 7 (24.1 %) Grade 2 and 5 (17.2 %) Grade 3. Shikata orcein revealed hepatitis B viral surface antigen in 15(29.4 %) of the cases while copper-associated protein was demonstrable in 6 (11.8 %) of the cases. The discovery of stainable iron implies some degree of disturbance of iron metabolism and a Grade 3 stainable iron requires investigation for genetic haemochromatosis. The demonstration of copper-associated proteins suggests biliary disease in a non-cirrhotic liver which also requires further investigation. Conclusion: This study highlights the deficiencies of reporting liver biopsies with H&E stain alone which does not help to fully investigate and manage the patient. Objective: The incidence of solid tumours is greater in patients with sarcoidosis. Joint presentation of the two diseases is an unusual finding. Method: A 26-year-old male smoker with a history of systemic sarcoidosis who presented with right lateral lymph-node enlargement and weight loss of 15 kg over 6 months. CT scan of chest and abdomen revealed bilateral laterocervical lymph-node enlargement, multiple swollen thoracic lymph nodes, and bilateral poorlydefined pulmonary nodules, the largest of which measured 1.5 mm. the spleen was enlarged. And A 30 mm hypodense lesion was visible in liver segment VI, subsequently confirmed with PET/TC. Abdominal MRI scan showed a possiblyneoplastic hepatic nodule measuring 4 × 3.5 cm in segment VI. Results: Examination of liver biopsy specimens revealed a population of neuroendocrine cells displaying positive immunostaining for CKEA1/ EA3, chromogranin and CD56+, and negative staining for TTF1; 1-2 % of proliferating cell were Ki67+, and occurred in conjunction with CD68+ multinucleated giant cells. Histochemical staining to rule out the presence of mycobacteria yielded negative results. The lesion was diagnosed as a liver metastasis from an unknown primary neuroendocrine tumour, within the context of systemic sarcoidosis. The patient was given one subcutaneous injection of 120 mg Lanreotide Autogel every 28 days, as a result of which chromogranin levels and liver function returned to normal. Conclusion: Sarcoidosis predisposes patients to certain types of tumours or whether it is the tumours that cause a sarcoid reaction remains a matter of debate. Objective: Keratin 7 and 19 (K7, K19) immunohistochemical staining (IHS) was employed in past studies to highlight ductular reactions (DR), "untethered" hepatocytes, and early loss of canals of Hering (CoH) in primary biliary cholangitis (PBC). This study aims to determine utility of K7 and K19 as adjunctive diagnostic methods in diverse chronic liver diseases. Method: 79 archival liver biopsy specimens (LBx) of biliary, non-biliary, and overlap cases were reviewed. Activity grading and staging was done on H&E and trichrome slides. CoH per portal tract (C/P ratio) on K19, extent of DR, amount and distribution of K7+ hepatocytes were assessed quantitatively and semiquantitatively as appropriate. Biliary and nonbiliary groups, early and late stages of disease were statistically compared. Results: C/P ratio is lower in biliary than non-biliary diseases (P < 0.0001) and diminished in PBC and overlap cases compared to PSC (P < 0.0001). More untethered K7+ hepatocytes are seen in early biliary than non-biliary diseases (p < 0.0052) significantly increasing in later stages (p < 0.0011). DR differs (p = 0.00002) between non-biliary and biliary diseases especially in PBC. Conclusion: Early stage LBx K7+ untethered hepatocytes favor chronic cholestatic over hepatitic liver disease. Markedly diminished CoH strongly supports PBC. K7 and K19 is useful in assessment of LBx when characteristic histologic findings are absent. E-PS-13-013 A pancreatic serous cystic neoplasm coexisting with high-grade pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia mimicking an intraepithelial papillary mucinous neoplasm: A case report A. Kawanishi * , K. Hirabayashi, M. Yamada, A. Hadano, Y. Takanashi, Y. Kawaguchi, T. Nakagohri, N. Nakamura, T. Mine * Tokai University, Dept. of Gastoroenterology, Isehara, Japan Objective: Serous cystic neoplasms (SCNs) of the pancreas are rare exocrine pancreatic neoplasms, most of which are benign and do not communicate with the pancreatic duct. Pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) is considered to be a precursor of ductal adenocarcinoma which is microscopically recognised in pancreatic ducts. Method: A 67-year-old Japanese woman presented with a 10-mm, multilocular, cystic lesion at the pancreatic body. Magnetic resonance pancreatography (MRP) showed stenosis of the main pancreatic duct at the pancreatic body and the dilatation of the distal side of the main pancreatic duct. Furthermore, communication between the cystic lesion and the main pancreatic duct was suspected by MRP. Distal pancreatectomy was performed under the preoperative diagnosis of an intraepithelial papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). Results: Histologically, the cystic lesion was lined with non-atypical cuboidal or flat epithelium with clear cytoplasm, and thus was diagnosed as an SCN. PanIN-2 or -3 lesions with stromal fibrosis were observed at the main and branch pancreatic ducts. Histological examination revealed no communication between the SCN and pancreatic ducts. Conclusion: An SCN coexisting with another pancreatic neoplasm is rare. When dilatation of the main or branch pancreatic ducts coexists with an SCN, as in this case, it clinically mimics IPMN. Objective: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common type of malignant tumour in the liver. Cell adhesions are important regulators of cell growth and motility and they are usually altered in cancer. The role of the hepatocyte cell adhesion molecule 2 (HEPACAM2), a member of the immunoglobulin family of adhesion genes, has not been analyzed so far in cancer. In the present study we studied protein expression levels of HEPACAM2 in HCC. Method: Twenty HCCs with available tissue were recruited from Pathology Department between 2008 and 2016. Clinical information was also obtained. A tissue microarray was performed with representative tumour regions and normal liver. Immunohistochemical techniques were applied to study protein expression levels of HEPCAM2 (Sigma Aldrich). Results: HEPACAM2 was weakly expressed in normal liver (nuclear staining). Most of HCCs showed a positive expression with three different staining patterns: nuclear, cytoplasmic and mixed. Statistical analysis showed a significant association between grade of differentiation and staining pattern. A significant correlation was noted between survival time, grade of differentiation and presence of metastasis. Staining patterns were also significantly correlated with presence of metastasis. Conclusion: Our study has revealed three different staining patterns of HEPCAM2 expression in HCCs with clinical relevance. Objective: Primary non-hodgkin lymphoma of the liver is an extremely rare entity. Fewer than 100 cases have been reported in the literature. Classically, it affects middle-aged males with non specific clinical expression and moderate biological perturbations. The purpose of this study was to analyze the clinicopathological features of this tumour and to discuss differential diagnoses. Method: A case with primary non-hodgkin lymphoma of the liver was diagnosed in our department. Clinical data and microscopic slides were retrospectively reviewed. Results: Our study was about a 94-year-old woman who presented with right upper-quadrant pain, jaundice and fever. Laboratory tests showed cholestasis and cytolysis. A cholecystectomy was performed as well as a hepatic surgical biopsy motivated by biological findings. Histological examination revealed chronic cholecystitis without acute lesions that could explain the symptoms of cholangitis. Immunohistological examination of the liver concluded to follicular B-cell non-hodgkin lymphoma, grade 1. There was no evidence of involvement of the lymph nodes or any other organ. These findings established the diagnosis of primary hepatic lymphoma. Conclusion: The diagnosis of primary hepatic lymphoma is important because the disease is treatable and with new therapeutic drugs, such as rituximab, overall survival has improved for these patients. * Charles Nicole Hospital, Pathology, Tunis, Tunisia Objective: Demonstrating the epidemiologic, histologic, immunohistochemical and prognostic features of solid pseudopapillary tumour of the pancreas (SPTP) and discussing its main differential diagnoses. Results: A 16-year-old girl complained of abdominal pain lasting for 6 months accompanied by weight loss, asthenia and anorexia. Physical examination identified an epigastric and right hypochondrial tenderness without a palpable mass. Abdominal CT and MRI showed a large pancreatic mass arising from the pancreatic body and tail measuring 10 cm and associated with two liver nodules, suggesting a pancreatoblastoma with hepatic metastases. A CT guided biopsy was performed. On histology, the tumour had a pseudopapillary architecture with fibrovascular stalks and small, uniform tumour cells with round nuclei. Tumour cells stained positively for CD 10, synaptophysin and Beta-catenin. We concluded to a SPTP that was confirmed after distal pancreatectomy with metastasectomy. The patient received post operative chemotherapy. Conclusion: SPTP are uncommon low malignant tumours that are rare in children. Metastatic disease unusual and only occurs in around 10 15 % of patients. Histologic differential diagnoses are pancreatoblastoma and neuroendocrine tumour. Immunohistochemistry is essential. Long term follow up is necessary since local recurrence or distant metastases occur in 10 15 % of patients. The value of chemotherapy remains unknown. Objective: Carcinosarcoma of the gallbladder is a rare aggressive neoplasm, accounting for 0.2 % of all gallbladder malignant neoplasms, and is composed of intermingled carcinomatous and sarcomatous components. The later can be heterologous, with osteosarcomatous or chondrosarcomatous elements present. We report a female patient who had advanced stage of this tumour, featuring chondrosarcomatous component with associated eosinophilic hyaline globules within the spindly component of the tumour. Method: Case Report: A 52-year old woman presented with abdominal pain and vomiting. Computed tomography revealed a huge exophytic gallbladder mass, invading or displacing the surrounding structures. The patient underwent radical cholecystectomy, transverse colectomy, distal gastrectomy, liver bed resection and omentectomy. Results: Gross Pathology: The resected gallbladder measured 13 cm and it contained a large exophytic friable tumour that measured 11 cm in length by 6 cm in diameter. Fleshy hemorrhagic tumour nodules were seen extending to the liver, omentum and wall of stomach and colon. Microscopic Findings: The tumour was biphasic featuring both solid malignant epithelial nest and spindly sarcomatous component with several islands of malignant cartilage, Several spindly cells show intracytoplasmic hyaline globules that was PAS positive. Conclusion: This is a rare case of carcinosarcoma of the gallbladder. We found 15 similar cases with chondrosarcomatous elements. However, this is the first case, to our knowledge, described with eosinophilic hyaline globules. E-PS-13-024 Primary hepatic solitary fibrous tumour: Two case reports and review of literature R. Rocha * , B. C. Zaidan, I. Barreto, J. Vassallo, F. Callejas, C. Bacchi, R. Amil, C. Ferreira, C. Escanhoela * Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Dept. de Patologica, Brazil Objective: Describe two rare cases of primary hepatic solitary fibrous tumour (SFT) and update the clinical, pathological and immunohistochemical features of this misdiagnosed entity. Method: Here we report two cases of liver SFT and review all the cases described to date. Results: The first case of a 61-year-old man who presented with an accidental finding of a large mass in the left liver and the second case of a 79-year-old man who presented with and 13 cm mass in the liver and multiple pulmonary lesions. Parcial hepatectomy was performed and revealed an SFT confirmed by histopathology and immunohistochemical findings. Conclusion: Primary hepatic STF is a rare mesenchymal neoplasm. Originated in the submesothelial tissue of the liver, this entity is frequently misdiagnosed because of its rarity and unfamiliar characteristics. Despite of its, SFT of the liver should be included in the differential diagnosis of hepatic mesenchymal tumours. A consensus on the essential and definite diagnostic criteria for primary hepatic solitary fibrous tumour must be reached in a timely manner. Objective: Sclerosing hemangiomas (SH) are unusual mesenchymal tumours of the liver. Due to their rarity and atypical imaging the differential diagnosis of SH with malignant hepatic lesions is often challenging. Method: Case notes, histological and immunohistochemical slides of five cases of SH reported in the last 15 years in our hospital were reviewed. Results: The average patient age was 74.6 years (67-82), two men and three women. In two cases the lesions were ressected as possible malignant hepatic tumours, two as suspected metastases and one as an incidental finding. The lesions, ranging from 3 to 55 mm were well-demarcated, firm, white nodules with, in the larger lesions, irregular contours. Microscopically, compressed thin walled vessels with flat endothelial lining without cytologic atypia were seen in a hypocellular densely hyalinised and sclerotic stroma. Immunoreactivity for CD 31 and CD 34 were seen in the lining cells and type IV collagen in the vessel wall. Conclusion: SH are rare, benign hepatic lesions, often submitted for histopathological examination as suspected malignant tumours. Objective: Most tumours of the ampulla of Vater are well-differentiated adenocarcinomas. Signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) at this site is uncommon, and only 30 resected cases have been previously reported in the English literature. We report the case of a 49-year-old man who presented an icterus evolving since 2 months. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) showed a swollen papilla of vater, with a reddish, erosive mucosa. Results: Histological examination of biopsy samples from the ampulla of vater showed signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC). The patient underwent radical pancreatoduodenectomy. Pathological examination showed that the SRCC had infiltrated into the duodenal muscularis propria and pancreatic parenchyma, and lymph node metastases were identified. Based on the immunohistochemical staining patterns of the positive results for CD19, CD7 and CD20. Conclusion: The origin of SRCCs remains controversial. Since they are predominantly found in gastric cancers, one theory is that these tumours originate from heterotopic gastric mucosa. Confirmation of the histological origin of SRCC by immunohistochemical staining may inform the appropriate treatment strategy. E-PS-13-027 Hepatic encephalopathy due to delayed liver metastasis of uveal melanoma C. Kouvidou * , G. Kyriakopoulos, A. Chatzimarinaki, A. Taliadoros, E. Geladari, N. Vallianou * Evaggelismos Hospital, Pathology, Athens, Greece Objective: After cutaneous melanoma, uveal melanoma is the second most common type of primary melanoma. Herein, we present a patient with liver metastasis of an uveal melanoma. Method: A 65 years old male presented to the hospital due to abdominal pain in the right upper quadrant of 15 days' duration. The patient had an uveal melanoma 9 years ago and had received local radiotherapy. On clinical examination, the patient appeared icteric with palpable liver. The CT revealed multiple lesions in the liver, the largest being 18 cm. Unfortunately, the patient died due to hepatic encephalopathy and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome without any chemotherapy, due to the high bilirubin levels. Results: The biopsy revealed extensive infiltration of liver by a malignant tumour with solid growth pattern, spindle cells, prominent nucleoli, necrosis, pigment and multiple melanophages. Immunohistochemistry was positive for Melan-A, HMB45, S-100 protein and MITF-1, compatible with metastasis from uveal melanoma. Conclusion: 40 to 50 % of patients develop systemic metastases and the liver is involved in 95 % of patients. While the median time to systemic tumour recurrence in a review was 3 years and 4 months, our case with such a late recurrence shows that close monitoring of the patients for many years is mandatory. Pyrosequencing analysis revealed an EGFR mutation at exon 21p.L858R. Patient was treated with erlotinib until October 2014 due to -Thursday, 29 September 2016 .3 E-PS-14 Molecular Pathology progression. A new biopsy was performed, p.L858R EGFR mutation remains. MET was not amplified by FISH. New biopsy was performed in February 2015. An NGS analysis (Oncomine panel; >1800 mutations in 22 cancer-associated genes) on Ion PGM sequencer (ThermoFisher) on all tumour biopsies and cfDNA showed concordant variants such as EGFR-p.L858R and TP53p.I195T. No druggable pathways were found. Thirty-six years old male diagnosed in March 2014 with MLA. IHC analysis showed ALK/MET positive and ROS1 negative. FISH analysis found an ALK rearrangement. Patient was treated with crizotinib, new biopsy was performed after progression. ALK positivity persisted by IHC, FISH and RT-qPCR analysis. Same NGS modalities were performed on tumour biopsies and cfDNA. No hotspot mutations were found on 22 genes including ALK. Conclusion: NGS is a promising technique; however it might have limited implications in daily clinical practice for some patients. Objective: The most common mutation in melanoma that is applicable for targeted therapy is the point mutation BRAFV600E on the exon 15 of the BRAF gene. Method: We performed a retrospective analysis of 145 metastatic melanoma samples that were tested with next generation sequencing covering the codons 581 to 620 of the BRAF gene (on exon 15) and the exons 2,3 and 4 of the NRAS gene. Results: 49 (33.8 %) samples were positive for a mutation in the BRAF gene and 24 (16.6 %) positive for a mutation in the NRAS gene. Of 49 BRAF-mutated samples 36 (73.5 %) were positive for BRAFV600E, 10 (20.5 %) BRAFV600K, one (2 %) BRAFN581S, one (2 %) BRAFK601E and one (2 %) harbored a BRAFK601N/E586K double mutation. Conclusion: BRAF inhibitors are crucial in the treatment of BRAFV600E mutated melanoma. As the European medicines agency approved BRAF inhibitors for all mutations in BRAFV600, the testing of mutations in BRAFV600 is obligatory. Further, there are case reports and in-vitro data on mutations in exon 15 other than BRAFV600 that are sensitive to targeted therapy. Testing of these other mutations may provide further therapeutic options for patients and should thus be included in routine melanoma mutation analysis panels. Objective: Bronchial-Pulmonary Adenocarcinomas induced the development of EGFR targeted therapies, including monoclonal antibodies and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, after molecular characterization. EGFR mutations are more frequently observed in patients with adenocarcinomas, female, non-smokers, East-Asian and predict response to TK Inhibitors (TKis). Method: A 66 years old woman presented two PET positive nodules in right lung different lobes in 2014. Then a right upper lobe surgical biopsy demonstrated an adenocarcinoma (acinar and solid patterns) and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue was analyzed for EGFR mutations by dideoxy sequencing (exons 19 and 21) and the exon 19 was also studied by fragment analysis. Results: EGFR exon 19 showed a duplication of the following amino acids: lysine, isoleucine, proline, valine, alanine and isoleucine; c . 2 2 1 4 _ 2 2 3 1 d u p T A A A A T T C C C G T C G C T A T;p.Lys739_Ile744dupLysIleProValAlaIle. The mutated allele had more 18 bp than wild type allele and this region corresponds to the tyrosine kinase domain; exon 21 was wild type. Conclusion: EGFR mutations are frequent, reflecting implication in lung adenocarcinomas pathogenesis and to prescribe personalized therapies. This case is similar to the rare case found by Kosaka T, Yatabe Y, Endoh H, et al. (2004) but biological significance and clinical outcome has not been referred yet. For now the patient is following Erlotinib with representative clinical outcome (RECIST). Objective: NGS in Pathology routine cannot be understood as an expensive methodology, to understand tumoural behavior, and is useful when diagnosis/therapy genes are enrolled. Method: Following three different histological types of lung cancer (micro-dissected: pre-neoplasic lesion and solid, acinar, and clear cell patterns separately sequenced) FFPE submitted to the Ion Torrent PGM for the 22 gene Oncomine panel analyzed from 10 ng of extracted DNA using 316 chips and 314 chips were analyzed, then data analysis was performed with the Ion Torrent Variant Caller Plugin (hg19) and Ion Report for prediction of the significance of the variants was produced. Results: All pre-neoplasic lesions showed KRAS hotspot mutations (COSM522 and COSM516), presence of PIK3CA (COSM249908) and TP53 (COSM10995 and COSM45044) found in two pre-neoplasic lesions. Tumours had similar hotspot pattern, with the same variants: KRAS (COSM522 and COSM516); TP53 (COSM10995; COSM43746 and COSM45044); and PIK3CA (COSM249908). Without significant differences between studied patterns, somatic variations were also found in FGFR2, DDR2, ERBB4, EGFR and MET genes. Conclusion: When compared with Sanger procedures, NGS brought easier interpretation of various sets of genes, related with carcinogenesis and allowing personalized therapy and/or previewing resistance to the treatment. The aim of NGS will be cost-effective lower procedures. Objective: Fluorescence in-situ hybridisation (FISH) and Immunohistochemistry (IHC) have been the historical gold-standard diagnostic approaches for the detection of chromosomal translocations. However, these methods are technically demanding and the interpretation of the results is challenging, even to expert operators. In contrast, RNA workflows such as RT-PCR and targeted RNA-seq are being increasingly used in diagnostics to detect the cancer fusion transcripts because of their accuracy, precision and simpler interpretation. These highly sensitive diagnostic workflows require the availability of high quality and consistent control material. Method: To this end, using Horizon's proprietary genetic manipulation and manufacturing technologies, we have engineered highly characterised and renewable patient-analogue control material in the form of FFPE sections. Results: Our single cell diluted clones and controlled manufacturing procedures ensure precise and reproducible expression levels of the most commonly found mRNA fusion biomarkers allowing kit manufacturers to develop their assays and diagnostic end-users to monitor their pre-analytical (RNA extraction) and analytical workflows (end-point RT-PCR, RT-dPCR and targeted RNA-seq). This allows continuous monitoring of the performance of RNAbased diagnostic assays giving increased confidence in results and better patient's outcomes. Conclusion: Horizon will discuss the making, the applications, the performance and the future development of RNA FFPE Reference standards. Objective: Activating mutations in the KRAS gene are found in 30-40 % of colorectal malignancies and are associated with poor response to anti-EGFR therapies. Until recently, the guidelines recommended testing for mutations in KRAS exon 2 (codons 12 and 13), the most common mutations in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (CRCm) whose tumours harbor RAS mutations. The updated guidelines recommend that before treatment with anti-EGFR antibody therapy, patients with CRCm should be tested for mutations in both KRAS and NRAS exon 2 (codons 12 and 13), exon 3 (codons 59 and 61) and exon 4 (codons 117 and 146). The effect of this extended mutational analysis on the percentage of patients that is more likely to benefit from an anti-EGFR therapy is studied. Method: 51 cases of CRCm were tested for detection of mutations in KRAS and NRAS exons 2, 3 and 4 using RealTime PCR (Entrogene). Results: Mutations in KRAS gene were detected in 21 cases (41 %). 18 mutations were located in exon 2 (35 %), while 3 mutations were observed in exon 3 and 4 (6 %). In addition, 3 mutations were detected in NRAS gene (6 %). Conclusion: The updated guidelines lead to the detection of 12 % of additional patients who are unlikely to respond to anti-EGFR therapy. Objective: Determine the types of HPV isolated in invasive cancers in Tunisian patients in order to guide the introduction of the prophylactic vaccine in Tunisia. Method: We worked on 76 cases of invasive cervical cancer. For detection, we used primers MY09 / MY11 and GP5 + / GP6 +. Genotyping was performed by the technique of Reverse Line Blot. Results: All the samples were infected with at least one type of HPV. HPV 16 and 18 were the most frequent types, with a percentage of 94,8 %, the highest frequency was that of HPV 16 (86,8 %) . Conclusion: These results support the introduction of prophylactic vaccines to prevent infection with HPV 16 and HPV 18. Objective: Our study aimed to analyze Periostin (PN) in ovarian cancer (OC), and to correlate its expression with clinico-morphological parameters. Method: The study group consisted of 102 cases of OC histopathologically diagnosed as serous (67 cases), endometrioid (13 cases), clear cells (4 cases), mucinous (13 cases), and other subtypes (5 case); 37 cases were classified as stage I, 10 as stage II, and 55 as stage III; 22 cases were assessed as G1, 31 cases as G2, 46 cases as G3, and 3 cases as undifferentiated. Tissue fragments were immunohistochemically processed using anti-PN antibody. Results: PN expression was positive in 10 cases and negative in 92 cases. The positive cases included 6 serous OC, 2 endometrioid OC, 1 clear cells and mucinous OC, respectively; 3 cases were stage I, and 7 cases stage II; tumour grade was G1 (3 cases), G2 (4 cases) and G3 (3 cases). No significant differences were noted between PN and histological subtypes, stage and grade. Conclusion: PN expression in all tumour subtypes reflects a various distribution, unrelatedly to phenotype. Lack of statistical correlation could be explained by PN ability of architectural restructuring of extracellular matrix, with direct repercussion on invasion and metastasis. Objective: Colorectal cancer (CR) causes majority of mortality in the world. The cetuximab or panitumumab is an effective single agent or chemotherapy for metastatic CR treatment. Molecular markers of colorectal cancer, including KRAS, NRAS and BRAF gene mutations and the microsattellite instability status are evaluated for the development of personalized treatment. In colorectal ancer, frequency of KRAS and NRAS gene mutations are 30-42 % and 2.2-5 %, respectively. In this study, we aimed detection of the frequency of NRAS (codon 12, 13,and 61) gene and KRAS (codon 12, 13, and 61) gene mutations in Turkish population with metastatic colorectal carcinoma. Method: We investigated KRAS gene (codon 12, 13, and 61) and NRAS gene (codon 12, 13, and 61) mutations by using pyrosequencing method in 60 patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma. The Therascreen® KRAS Pyro® Kit (QIAGEN) and the Therascreen® NRAS Pyro® Kit (QIAGEN) were used. Results: The KRAS and NRAS gene mutations were not detected in 37/60 (61.6 %) patients. The KRAS gene mutations were detected in 21/60 (35 %) patients, which were G12D mutation in 13/21 patients, G12V mutation in 3/21 patients, G12C mutation in 2/21 patients and Q61L mutation in 1/21 patient. The NRAS gene mutations were detected in 3/60 (5 %) patients, which were G12D mutation in 1/3 patient, Q61K mutation in 1/3 patient and Q61R mutation in 1/3 patient. Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that the frequency of NRAS and KRAS gene mutations in Turkish patients with metastatic colorectal cancer is consistent with the literature. increases with decreasing expression of PTC-DR (p < 0.001). Therefore, the severity PTC destruction had a significant impact on the development of TG. Conclusion: Early US changes and capillary DR expression are helpful for predicting the development of TG. This may be useful for determining the patients' with the risk of TG and chronic rejection. E-PS-15-005 Kidney biopsy yield is contingent upon the biopsy operator and the interpreter of adequacy when evaluated at the time of the procedure M. Sekulic * , G. S. Crary * University of Minnesota, Lab. Medicine and Pathology, Minneapolis, USA Objective: To evaluate the yield of kidney biopsies performed by different practitioners, using different imaging modalities for guidance, and with different performers of immediate interpretation of adequacy. Method: The number of glomeruli and arteries, and the rate of significant complications secondary to the biopsy procedure were retrospectively reviewed from 362 kidney biopsies. These parameters were compared between differing practitioners performing the biopsy (nephrologists or radiologists), differing imaging modalities for guidance (ultrasound or computed tomography), and between differing interpreters of biopsy adequacy conducted at the time of biopsy (general pathologists, renal pathologists, nephrologists). Results: Biopsies utilizing immediate interpretation were found to have more glomeruli (p = 0.002) and arteries (p = 0.019) when the biopsy was performed by a radiologist compared to a nephrologist. There were significantly more glomeruli (p = 0.0001) and arteries (p = 0.0005) in biopsies with the immediate interpretation performed by pathologists (no difference whether general or renal pathologist) compared to nephrologists. The rate of complications did not significantly differ regardless of biopsy operator or the interpreter of immediate adequacy. Conclusion: The yield of kidney biopsy material may depend on the practitioner conducting the biopsy and the interpreter of immediate adequacy at the time of biopsy. Method: Fifty-seven cases of diabetic patients were divided in DN group (n = 19) and DN superimposed group (n = 38). GBM morphometry, DN classification and quantification of TGF-β1 and fibronectin expression were performed. Results: DN group showed thicker GBM than DN superimposed group. TGF-β1 immunostaining in DN superimposed group was higher in glomerular and tubulointerstitial compartments. Fibronectin expression was higher in tubulointerstitial compartment. Class III presented higher proteinuria levels than Class I and increased GBM thickness than Class I and II. Class IV had higher serum creatinine levels and lower TGF-β1 expression in glomerular and tubulointerstitial compartments than Class I. Class III presented increased glomerular fibronectin comparing to Class IV. Patients with less than 10 years of diabetes showed increased GBM thickness and significant positive correlation between GBM thickness and proteinuria. Conclusion: GBM thickness and expression of TGF-β1 and fibronectin are related to DN pathogenesis. We conclude that the use of TGF-β1 and fibronectin in situ can be an important tool in the diagnosis of evolution and progression of DN regarding different classes of this entity. Objective: BKV reactivation in immunosuppressed patients may cause nephropathy and organ loss in renal transplant recipients. BKV may also be associated with an increased risk of kidney and bladder carcinomas. We report a renal transplant patient with BKV nephropathy who developed a urinary bladder carcinoma 10 years post-transplant. Method: A 60-year-old female with microscopic polyangiitis received a kidney transplant and immunosuppressive therapy. Two years later a renal biopsy showed BKV nephropathy and 10 years later a urinary bladder biopsy revealed high-grade urothelial carcinoma with giant cells. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for SV40 was performed on both biopsies. Results: Renal biopsy showed a dense, cortical and medullary, lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. The tubular epithelium exhibited numerous inclusions and strong SV40 nuclear immunoreactivity. Interstitial fibrosis/tubular atrophy affected >50 % of the cortex. Glomeruli (16) showed slightly increased mesangial matrix. No Ig or complement deposits were detected. Bladder biopsy revealed a high-grade urothelial carcinoma with a multinucleated giant cell component and extensive, strong immunoreactivity for SV40 in tumour cell nuclei. Nonneoplastic urothelium was negative. Conclusion: This case adds to a small number of kidney transplant recipients showing an association between BKV reactivation and aggressive variants of urothelial carcinoma. The strong viral immunoreactivity displayed by tumour cells lends support to BKV oncogenic potential. Objective: To present a case of a 44-year old man that suffered from intermittent dizziness and headaches,and in a MRI a tumour was discovered in the cerebellopontine angle and histologically is consistent with a myxoid chondrosarcoma. Method: The patient's information and imagenology studies were retrieved in order to present this rare tumour. Results: Histological analysis revealed the tumour tissue fragment corresponded to cells in round nodules disposition and a few spindle shaped cells alternating with island of chondroid tissue in a myxoid backgrounds. It had no mitosis and mild atypia. Immunohistochemical markers based on S-100 were positive in tumour cells and the Ki67 was 1 %. The sample was negative for cytokeratin and carcinoembryonic antigen. A diagnosis of low grade myxoid chondrosarcoma was reported. Conclusion: Myxoid chondrosarcoma is a rare tumour, usually found in the lower extremities, with an intermediate grade, and tendency to relapse and metastasize. Chondrosarcoma accounts for 6 % of neoplasms of the base of the skull and 0.15 % of all intracranial tumours. To the authors' knowledge, this is the ninth report of this variant reported at this location. The tumour origin is believed to be the choroid plexus, the pineal region or the dura mater. It is more frequent in males. The incidence is unknown and the prognosis is generally poor due to its local invasion. Objective: Originally derived from the neural crest, melanocytes are normal constituents of the pia mater and subarachnoid. They are widely scattered across the meninges with higher density in the central area of the superior spinal cord, brainstem and skull base. Meningeal melanocytoma is an uncommon, slowly growing, well differentiated melanocytic neoplasm. It was first described in 1972 and currently accounts for less than 0,1 % of brain tumours. Method: A 47 years old man was admitted to our hospital, accusing bilateral paresthesia of the upper limbs, often accompanied by pain. MRI revealed a T1 hyperintense craniospinal lesion of about 19/17,6/ 41,1 mm occupying most of the spinal canal from the foramen magnum to C2-C3 level. Neurosurgical resection was performed. Results: The most striking feature of the tumour, both macroscopic and microscopic was that of a heavily pigmented lesion. Histopathological appearance featured nestes of slightly spindled, pigmented cells with oval nuclei and small nucleoli, often with perivascular distribution and accompanied by melanophages. No cytologyc atypia or mytotic figures were present. It was diagnosed as meningeal melanocytoma, later confirmed by immunohistochemestry. Postsurgical evolution was favorable and the patient undergoes neurological followup. Conclusion: Primary CNS melanocytic neoplasms have intrigued pathologists for many years. When evaluating these lesions, special attention must be paid to their histologic features to distinguish melanocytoma from its malignant counterpart. Objective: Gliosarcoma is a rare neoplasm of the central nervous system characterized by biphasic histological pattern displaying both glial and sarcomatous components. Method: A 62 year-old woman presented with a left sided hemiparesia and symptoms of intracranial hypertension. On physical examination, the patient was confused with left hemiplegia. Computer tomography revealed an irregular enhancing mass lesion involving the frontal insular cortex that was thought to be consistent with a brain metastasis. A craniotomy was performed with gross total resection of the tumour. Results: On gross examination, the tumour was grey colored with bleeding and necrotic components. Microscopic examination showed a mix of glial and sarcomatous components with large areas of necrosis. The glial component was composed of large atypical cells with numerous mitotic figures. The mesenchymal elements were composed of spindle shaped cells with elongated, excentrated, vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. The glial components were GFAP positive. Mesenchymal cells were GFAP, KL1 negative, vimentin and caldesomon positive. The diagnosis of rhabdomyoblastic gliosarcoma was made . The patient passed away few days after surgery. Conclusion: Gliosarcoma is an aggressive tumour characterized by a biphasic glial and sarcomatous pattern. However, it is not well established whether it is a variant from glioblastoma or a separate entity. Objective: The papillary glioneuronal tumour is a relatively new entity in neuropathology. It was first described in 1996 as a "pseudopapillary ganglioneurocytoma" by Komori. In 2007 it was included in the WHO clasification with less than 40 cases reported in literature. Method: We present the case of a 51 years old man, admitted to our hospital with left sided hemiparesis, dizziness and headaches. Neuroimaging revealed a large, well demarcated cystic tumour in the right temporal and parietal lobes. Its largest diameter was of 73 mm and it contained an inner solid component of about 15 mm. The patient was scheduled for neurosurgery and intraoperative consultation was requested, revealing characteristic neuronal and glial features. The lesion was excised and thoroughly examined by light microscopy. Results: H-E histologic sections showed small oligodendrocyte-like tumour cells forming vasocentric papillae and solid, nodular structures with a neuropil-like matrix. The cells in this matrix ranged from oligodendroglia-like neurocites to well differentiated neurons. The final diagnosis was of a papillary glioneuronal tumour. Conclusion: While still an uncommon find, it is important to recognize this lesion as it is a grade I neoplasm with excellent prognosis. Despite sharing many common features to other neuroglial tumours, its papillary architecture is highly distinctive. Soon after excision, our patient's condition improved with slight remission of the symptoms. Objective: Ganglioneuroma is an asymptomatic clinically silent tumour that rarely occur in the adrenal glands. Diagnosis is often incidental because unlike other neuroblastic tumours it does not secrete excess catecholamine or steroid hormones. However, an index of suspicion with radiographic studies such as MRI, CT scan and tissue biopsy can aid early detection. Results: Case Report: A 25-year-old female presented with 10-months history of a right flank pain and persistent headache. Pain was none radiating and dull. Clinical examination was of a well-preserved female, with a 6 × 5 cm non tender right flank mass, BP = 120/80 mmHg, Pulse = 88 bpm, Urea and electrolytes were within range. CT scan revealed a circumscribed mass on the upper pole of the right kidney. Tissue biopsy showed compressed adrenal tissue by a well-circumscribed tumour composed of intersecting fascicles of spindle cells with wavy nuclear contours and interspersed by clusters of mature ganglion cells. It was diagnosed mature ganglioneuroma. Conclusion: Adrenal ganglioneuroma is a rare serendipitous neoplasm mimicking other neuroblastic tumours due to non-specificity of symptoms. Ancillary radiographic studies such as MRI and CT scan may aid pre-operative diagnosis. However, the mainstay of diagnosis is tissue biopsy with identification mature ganglion cells with neural tissues. E-PS-16-008 Cerebral schistosomiasis: Case report and literature review M. Studart * , A. Nascimento, N. Canedo, A. Caroli Bottino * University of Rio de Janeiro, Dept. of Pathology, Brazil Objective: Schistosomiasis is a parasitic disease most incident in Africa, Southeast Asia and South America, reaching 230 million cases reported worldwide. Neuroschistosomiasis (NE) is considered a rare complication, affecting mainly the spinal cord, followed by cerebellum, with few cases affecting the brain. We report a case of cerebral schistosomiasis caused by S. mansoni with pseudotumoural presentation. Method: A 19-year-old man presented with headache and refractory seizures. The computed tomography (CT) showed a front-parietal expansive lesion with perilesional edema suggesting astrocytoma. Results: After excision, the histology revealed granulomas surrounding S. mansoni eggs. He was treated with praziquantel and prednisone, with clinical improvement and resolution of the lesion. Conclusion: In NE, the eggs of the parasites migrate through the vertebral venous plexus, causing immune reaction and granuloma formation. The spinal cord is usually affected by S. mansoni and S. haematobium and acute myelopathy is the most common manifestation. Cerebral disease is most often caused by S. japonicum and the clinical presentation varies from acute encephalitis to lesions that can be mistaken for tumours, especially gliomas. NE should be considered in the differential diagnosis of lesions in the central nervous system of patients who live or have visited endemic areas. E-PS-16-009 A rare case of hemangioblastoma of the cerebellum K. Koulia * , A. Tsavari, E. Arkoumani, G. Sotiropoulou, K. Manoloudaki, T. Vasilakaki * Tzaneio General Hospital, Dept. of Pathology, Pireas, Greece Objective: Hemangioblastoma is a rare, slow growing tumour of the central nervous system uncertain histogenesis. Hemangioblastoma occur both sporadically predominantly in the cerebellum and in association with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. Method: A 71 year old woman presented with a 5 month history of headache, vomiting and walking instability. Imaging studies demonstrated a cyst in the cerebellum measuring 3 cm in greatest diameter with a well-circumscribed mural nodule measuring 1,4 cm. The lesion was resected. Results: Microscopically the nodule consisted of clear stromal cells in a rich capillary network. The stromal cells showed low mitotic rate and cells were positive for Vimentin,S100p, NSE and negative for GFAP, EMA,CD10,D240 and VEGF.A limited population of tumour cells was immunoreactive with CD56 and Inhibin A. The Ki67 index was low. Based on the previously mentioned morphologic and immunohistochemical characteristics the diagnosis of hemangioblastoma WHO grade I was posed. Conclusion: Hemangioblastoma is an uncommon neoplasm which have rather characteristic MR imaging features. The prognosis is excellent if surgical resection can be achieved. Other neoplasms with clear cell features should also be considered in the differential diagnosis. Objective: Report a central neurocytoma case in a Brazilian male. Method: Case description: A 20-year-old unconscious male was admitted to the department of emergency and he was diagnosed with intracranial hypertension (IH). He reported headaches during the last 6 months, and also blackouts and vomitings. The computerised tomography (CT) showed an expansive intraventricular tumour, with mass effect, and obstructive hydrocephalus. The histopathological analyse showed multiple softened and greyish material fragments measuring 2,8 × 2,4 × 0,6 cm, with regular structures and differentiated small lymphocytes like cells, with enlarged and bare nuclei, coarse chromatin, pale and clear cytoplasm, compact arrangements with rosettes like structures, rare mitoses and occasional atypia, without necrosis or haemorrhage. The Immunohistochemistry analyse (IHA) with the peroxidase system revealed EMA, GFAP, vimentin negative, Ki-67 (+4 %), CD57 (+) and IDH1 (inconclusive), and together with other findings that were compatible with Central Neurocytoma. Results: Discussion: Most patients present IH as initial symptom in neurocytomas. The clinical history is short and is not easy to make the differential diagnosis with other intraventricular tumours, such as oligodendroglioma and ependymoma, which was our first hypothesis. The IHA for the neuronal markers such as synaptophysin, calcineurin, neuron specific enolase and microtubule-associated with the protein 2, as well as the immuno-negativity for the glial fibrillary acidic protein and for the neurofilament proteins allowed our diagnosis. The tumour rarity and typical presentation are peculiarities in this case. Conclusion: Neurocytomas must be remembered as a cause of IH. E-PS-16-011 Brain stem atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumour in a 27-yar-old male: A case report K. Zarkovic * , J. Paladino, D. Ozretic * University of Zagreb, Medical Faculty, Dept. of Neuropathology, Croatia Objective: Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT) is highly malignant pediatric CNS tumour associated with inactivation of the INI 1/hSNF5 gene, composed of rhabdoid cells with variable primitive neuroctodermal, mesenchimal and epithelial components. AT/RT is presenting in children under the age of 3 years, rarely in older children and sporadically in adults. Method: A 27-yar-old male was admitted to our hospital with recent history of headache, vertigo, vomiting, rapid onset of bilateral deafness and bilateral narrowing of the visual field. MRI showed obstructive hydrocephalus due mesencephalic tumour which surrounding lamina quadrigemina and compressed aqueducts. After suboccipital craniotomy, we received grayish tissue which measured 2 cm in diameter. Results: Hematoxylin-eosin histology revealed tumour composed of rhabdoid cells in lobular organization, surrounded by abundant stroma. Tumour cells had abundant cytoplasm and vesicular nucleus. Tumour was necrotic with rare mitoses and Ki67 up to 12 %. Tumour cells were negative for PLAP, OCT3/4, AE1/3, INI1 and immunopositive to EMA, NSE, synaptophisin, GFAP and SMA. Conclusion: In conclusion we found that the tumour was very rare case of AT/RT in brain stem of an adult young man, the cells of which were less positive for Ki67 than is usual for these tumours. We have a rare case of a man who present a Choroid plexus papilloma (CPP) involving the fourth ventricle. Method: Ten months ago, this patient consult the urgency of the military hospital of Tunis and was hospitalized in neurosurgery. Results: We report a case of a 30 years old man who presented symptoms of increased intracranial pressure for 2 months. The patient did not have any medical history or family history related to brain lesion. CT scan and Brain MRI showed a lobulated hypervascular 50 × 40 × 50 mm sized mass intensely enhanced on contrast study and occupying the whole of fourth ventricle with obstructive hydrocephalous. The treatement was the surgery excision. The tumour appeared macroscopically as cauliflowerlike, 40 mm sized masse, brownish and friable. Histopathology revealed a papillary tumour with a delicate fibrovascular core lined by columnar or cuboidal epithelial cells with vesicular nuclei without nuclear atypia, mitosis, and necrosis. Their appearance is very similar to normal choroid plexus. Conclusion: CPP is a benign neuroepithelial intraventricular lesion WHO grade I account for less than 1 % of all brain tumours. It is most commonly found in children (2-6 %) and rarely in adult (0,5 %). Very few reports of CPP in adult are present in the literature. Objective: To describe and analyze the characteristics of suicide cases occurred in Morocco and presented neuropsychiatric disorders due to drug intoxication, in order to contribute to the reduction of morbidity and mortality that result. Method: This is a retrospective study of all cases of suicide by drugswhich presented neuropsychiatric disorders -, occurred in Morocco between 1990 and 2013, and reported to the Moroccan Poison Control Centre. Results: In 24 years, 1674 cases were reported (399 adolescents and 1275 adults). The sex-ratio (F/M) was 2,9. The psycholeptics (59 %) were the most implicated from the morbidity viewpoint, the antiparkinsonians (5,3 %) were from the lethality viewpoint. The median duration of consultation was 4 h. The most observed neuropsychiatric disorders were somnolence (33 %) and hypoesthesia (29 %). Coma had appeared with a lethality of 4,9 %. Decontamination was carried out in 57 % of cases. Twenty-two cases have kept sequelae, 11 have died. Following the oddsratio analysis, the gender is a risk factor (a risk of 5 for males). Conclusion: Suicidal poisoning by nervous system drugs causes severe cases which require immediate medical attention but also a heavy management. The best therapeutic approach remains prevention, so it is important to follow the anti-toxic control strategy. Objective: To present a case of a pilomyxoid astrocytoma (PMA) in a 21yo male patient. PMA is a recently recognized WHO grade 2 tumour that was previously characterized as a subtype of the WHO grade 1 pilocytic astrocytoma. PMA is reported to have an average age at presentation ranging from 10 to 18 months. Method: The patient presented to our hospital with an episode of severe headache. An MRI scan revealed a mass in the suprasellar region of the brain. Two biopsies of the tumour, each measuring 0,5 cm, were sent to our laboratory and were examined using hematoxylin and eosin slides, as well as immunohistochemical techniques. Results: Microscopically the tumour was composed of piloid cells in a mucoid matrix, with a predominantly angiocentric cell arrangement. The lesion did not contain Rosenthal fibers or eosinophilic granular bodies. The tumour cells were positive for vimentin, GFAP, S-100 and Synaptophysin, while ki-67 was estimated at less than 3 %. These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of PMA. Conclusion: PMA typically presents in the very young (median 10 months) and can occur in older children. They are rare in adults. To our knowledge there are only 23 adult patients with PMA reported in the English language literature. Objective: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a multisystem disorder that's characterized by the growth of nervous system tumours. Pilocytic astrocytomas, preferably located within the optic pathway, are the major type of central nervous system (CNS) tumours in this disease but synchronous lesions, especially in unusual ages and localizations, are rare. We will report a case. Method: A 42-year-old woman, with HIV infection, presented with seizure. The MRI revealed two synchronous CNS tumours: one in the parietal lobe and the other in the cerebellum. The previous year patient was diagnosed with a multifocal GIST of the small bowel. Results: Both CNS tumours had morphological features consistent with pilocytic astrocytomas, as cystic morphology, Rosenthal fibers and eosinophilic granular bodies. None had BRAF or IDH1 mutations neither MGMT hypermethylation. With that unusual combination of neoplasms pathologists alerted for NF1. After that other clinical signs of NF1 were found, so a genetic test was ordered. Conclusion: NF1's patients require a multidisciplinary follow-up where pathologists may play a role. Pathologist should always alert for NF1 when facing a pilocytic astrocytoma of optic pathway but synchronous pilocytic astrocytomas or multifocal GISTs, although not being a diagnostic criteria, should also raise suspicion. Objective: Spindle-cell oncocytoma (SCO) is a grade I tumour according to WHO/2007 classification. It was presumed that SCO arises from the folliculostellate cells of the adenohypophysis but recent immunohistochemical and ultrastructactural studies suggest that it derives from the pituicytes of the posterior pituitary and thus shares a common origin with pituicytomas and granular cell tumours. Method: A 52-year-old woman presented with headache and visual disturbances. CT scan showed a tumour with suprasellar extension compressing the optic chiasm that resembled a macroadenoma. The tumour could not be easily separated from the pituitary during the surgical operation. Method: The patient was asymptomatic, however there was clinical suspicion of a hamartomatous lesion. After splenectomy, the organ's weight was 200 g, measuring 12 × 9 × 6cm. Gross examination revealed a solitary, well-circumscribed, unencapsulated, redish, partially hemorrhagic tumour with maximum diameter 5.5 cm. Results: Microscopically, structurally disorganized splenic red pulp tissue (highlighted by reticulin stain), with no organized white pulp, was observed. Sinusoidal vascular structures were present, in an inflammatory background with histiocytic predominance. The cells of the lesion were positive for CD-8 and CD-34, focally positive for CD-31, whereas Factor VIII was negative. These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of splenic hamartoma. Conclusion: Splenic hamartoma is a tumour-like malformation most commonly representing an incidental finding. Sometimes it is difficult to differentiate a splenic hamartoma from a splenic hemangioma, which is the most common primary tumour of the spleen. A positive stain for CD-8 is helpful in such cases, as splenic hamartomas are immunoreactive for CD-8, while splenic hemangiomas are CD-8 negative. Objective: Thymic carcinoma frequently spreads to the pleural space, regional lymph nodes, liver and brain. However, the initial clinical presentation involving spinal metastases is extremely rare. Method: We present a case of a 62-year old female with progressive paraparesis. The CT and the MRI showed a neoplastic lesion with an intradural component, which caused the spinal compression, and an extradural component; located on the left edge of the spinal canal at the level of the thoracic vertebrae T11-T12. Results: Microscopically the neoplastic cells were of medium size, with scant cytoplasm, atypical dark nuclei, frequent mitoses. They were organized in solid nests. Necrosis was absent and crushing artifact was observed in some areas. The immunohistochemical study revealed positivity of the neoplastic cells for CKAE1/AE3, CK8, 34BE12, P63, CD5, while CK20, TTF1, GCDFP15, CD56, Synaptophysin, CD45(LCA), HMB45 were negative. Conclusion: Immunohistochemical examinations using CKAE1/AE3, P63 and mainly the thymic-carcinoma specific marker CD5 were crucial for confirming the primary site in the Thymus and should be performed in all cases of cancer of unknown origin. Objective: The Central Region of Ghana has many world heritage sites related to the slave trade dotted along its sandy beaches. We aimed at finding out the causes of death in the Central Region of Ghana, and highlight the potential effects of these causes of death on tourism and socio-economic development. Method: Mortality data from autopsies provide data about the causes of death in the communities of the Central Region. A retrospective descriptive study of autopsy data for the Central Region was carried out over a 2-year period in the Cape Coast Teaching Hospital the only autopsy center in the Central Region. Results: Out of 470 autopsies performed, 72 % were males and 28 % females. 52.8 % were young adults (18-44 years). Unnatural deaths were the leading cause of death (58.7 %) most being road traffic accidents (58-30.4 % as occupants of vehicles 21.4 % as pedestrians), followed by drowning (15.9 %). 14. 3 % of deaths were due to infections followed by cardiovascular deaths (6.8 %). Conclusion: There is a high prevalence of road traffic accidents and drowning in the Central Region of Ghana and infections remain a significant cause of death. This has a negative effect on tourism and socioeconomic development. Objective: The most recent World Health Organization (WHO) classification of the tumours of soft tissue considered the term hemangiopericytoma (HPC) obsolete, and places all such tumours within the extrapleural solitary fibrous tumour (SFT) category. In contrast, central nervous system SFT and HPC continue to be regarded as different entities in the latest version of the WHO CNS tumour classification. This study aims to highlight the helpful histological and immunohistochemical features of each of hemangiopericytoma and solitary fibrous tumour to enable reproducible classification. Method: 25 solitary fibrous tumours and hemangiopericytoma with variable histological features and different localization were selected and then stained for CD34; BCL2; VIMENTINE and CD99. Results: The mean age of the patients at the time of surgery was 50 years. The male-to-female ratio was 1:1.25. The most common presenting clinical symptoms were a slow growing mass. The characteristic immunoprofile of solitary fibrous tumour was BCL2+ with diffuse staining; CD99+; VIMENTIN+ and CD34+ with a diffuse and intense staining. For hemangiopericytoma, the immunoprofile was BCL2+ with focal staining; CD99+; VIMENTIN+; and CD34±. Conclusion: Staining for CD34; BCL2; VIMENTINE and CD99 comprises a concise panel for distinguishing Solitary fibrous tumour from Hemangiopericytoma. E-PS-18-006 Cutanosis amyloidosis: A study with Tioflavin-t and Congo-red staining B. Igde * , B. Yaman, B. Gerçeker Türk, T. Akalin, S. Sen * Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Pathology, Ýzmir, Turkey Objective: Cutaneous amyloidosis is one of the most common localized amyloidosis. Commonly cutaneous biopsies are examined with the H&E stain. Amyloid can be also detected with several techniques such as Congo-red stain, as well as crystal violet, thioflavin, methyl violet stains, cytokeratin 5/6 stain. The goal of this study is to reevaluate the stains of Congo-red and thioflavin-t of cutanous amyloidosis. Method: Twenty-seven cases of cutaneous amyloidosis diagnosed between 2013 and 2016 years were included the study. Congo-red staining and its typical polarization were used to diagnose amyloidosis. Original congo red stained sections were compared with decolorized and restained with thioflavin-t sections of 27 cases with cutaneous amyloidosis. Results: 16/27 patients were female and 11 were male. While 24 cases were localised cutaneous amyloidosis, 3 were systemic. Most of the localized amyloidosis were primary localized type except one secondary amyloidosis due to the seborrheic keratosis. Thioflavin-t was stained of all cases and it was evaluated easily than Congo-red. One case was diagnosed during the study who were not stained with Congo-red before. Later, due to severe IUGR and polyhydramnion, the pregnancy was terminated by c.s. at the 31st week of gestation. The neonate had dysmorphic facies with normal head circumference, presented with seizures and no respiratory activity. Postnatal USG of the head revealed HA. The neonate died 56 h after delivery. At autopsy, the transillumination sign was positive. Hemispheres were formed by 1 mm thick layer of pio-glial membrane. Cerebellum and optic nerves were atrophic. Otherwise, autopsy findings were within normal limits. Conclusion: We refer a rare case of HA, in which the injury of the brain must have developed between 13th and 23rd weeks of gestation. No infection or other possible known causes of HA were identified. Objective: Liver tumours are uncommon during childhood, when they show an age-dependent distribution and are mostly malignant. Hepatic mesenchymal hamartoma (HMH) is a rare benign lesion, presumably congenital, usually occuring under the age of 2. There is still no agreement upon its histogenesis, whether it represents developmental anomaly, true neoplasm or reactive lesion resulting from biliary obstruction or anomalous blood supply. Results: A 1-year-old boy was admitted due to acute abdomen. Clinical investigation revealed a hepatic tumour (US, MR) which was surgically removed. The tumour was torquated around a stalk connected to falciform ligament, and adherent to omentum and transverse colon. Grossly, it had gray-brown, glistening, lobular surface and measured 6 × 5,5 × 4,5 cm. The cut-surface was necrotic and hemorrhagic, with only a narrow rim of preserved solid tissue at the periphery. Histologically, it was composed of abundant, myxoid and loose stroma with focally dilated bile ducts, sparse cords of hepatocytes and numerous blood vessels, some of which thrombosed. There were only a few mitotic figures, but no atypia. No extramedullary haematopoiesis was noted. The tumour margins were positive. Conclusion: Unlike classic HMH showing multiple cysts, sometimes resembling lymphangioma, the tumour in our case was solid and pedunculated. Although the lesion is benign and should not recur, since it may rarely progress into malignancy, we believe our patient should be followed-up for a longer period. Objective: Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome (MMIHS) is a congenital disorder characterized by abdominal and urinary bladder distension, microcolon and abnormal GI peristalsis. Method: We report the case of a newborn with suspicious antenatal ultrasound findings: distended urinary bladder and abdomen. After the birth she was transferred to the NICU and multiple investigations were performed, including pathological examination of ileal and colonic biopsies. Results: Complementary investigations revealed a thick walled urinary bladder, narrowing of the rectosigmoid and other anomalies. The laparostomy confirmed the malrotation of the mesentery, with rightsided jejunoileum and left-sided ileocecal valve. The histology revealed fibrous submucosa and hyperplastic ganglion cells. Muscularis propria (MP) showed a hypoplastic external layer and hyperplastic myenteric plexus. Immunohistochemistry revealed weak SMA reaction of the internal MP layer. S100 showed the hyperplastic feature of the myenteric plexus. Calretinin was negative in ganglion cells and neural fibers. The ileum showed edematous submucosa, with atrophic MP, weakly positive for SMA. Ganglion cells were present and hyperplastic in the myenteric plexus. S100 and Calretinin were positive in neural structures. Conclusion: MMIHS is a severe disorder with poor prognosis and limited lines of treatment. The case presented revealed an interesting immunohistochemically profile, somewhat similar to Hirschprung's disease. The infant was alive 10 months after the birth, with left ileostomy and gastrostomy. Objective: Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome (BWS) is rare, with an incidence of 1/14.000 newborns, mostly sporadic, with rare cases linked to anomalies of chromosome 11, characterized by overgrowth leading to an asymmetric or uneven appearance, known as hemihyperplasia. We aim to present a review of clinicopathologic correlation of BWS at our institution. Method: We present a 9 year retrospective (2006-2015) review of BWS, performing a correlation between pre-natal ultrasonography, morphological characteristics findings and literature. Results: The study included four cases, 2M/2F, with gestational age between 19 and 36 weeks, three from medical termination pregnancies and one from a fetal death. The characteristics found in ultrasonography were increased kidney volume in all cases; omphalocele, overgrowth, kidneys with low differentiation and macroglossia in half of cases. The characteristics features observed in autopsy were: dysplastic kidneys (75 %), increased adrenal gland (75 %) omphalocele (50 %), macroglossia (50 %), pancreatic hyperplasia (50 %), and reduction of the head perimeter (50 %). All cases, but one, have a clinical diagnose of BWS and one case have molecular confirmation (25 %), none with family history. Conclusion: The recognition of this syndrome is an important finding for a correct genetic counseling for future pregnancies of the parents. Objective: Meckel Gruber syndrome is a lethal autosomal recessive disorder, caused by the failure of mesodermal induction. It is characterised by meningo-encephalocele, policystic kidneys and polydactyly. Other abnormalities associated with this syndrome is cleft palate, cardiovascular disease, hepatic ductal dysplasia, oligohydramnios, genital deformations, bowed legs, microcephaly, hydrocephalus, pulmoner hipoplasia. The world wide incidence varies from 1 in 1.300 to 1 in 140.000 live births. Highest incidance was reported in Gujarati Indians. Method: A 29-year-old patient was admitted to the hospital with gestation at 12 weeks. She had a previous healthy fullterm pregnancy. There was no history of teratogenic drugs or infectious disease. A routine ultrasonography revealed a single fetus with occipital encephalocel and bilateral polycystic kidneys. The pregnancy was terminated and a 22 g male fetus was delivered and send for autopsy. Macroscopic examination of the fetus showed polydactyly, occipital encephalocel measuring 2 × 1 cm and Objective: To describe the case of a middle-aged male with an incidental pulmonary cribriform adenocarcinoma and to review the literature on this entity. Method: A 50 year old gentleman, who was being followed up for a pericardial cyst discovered in 2012, was found to have a 10 mm left upper lung nodule on follow-up computed tomographic assessment in 2014. This lesion grew from 10 to 17 mm by the end of 2015 and thereupon, both the pericardial cyst and the lung lesion were excised. The tumour histologically exhibited a predominantly cribriform appearance, with mucin-filled acinar structures set in a desmoplastic stroma, together with a focal thyroid-like appearance. Diffuse TTF1 and CK7 positivity together with CK20, thyroglobulin, calretinin, synaptophysin, keratin 5/6 and calponin negativitiy confirmed the pulmonary origin of the tumour. Results: The patient is well, with no evidence of recurrence. Conclusion: Pulmonary cribriform adenocarcinomas are exceedingly rare and are often misdiagnosed as metastatic tumours. They are currently considered a subtype of acinar adenocarcinoma. They occur predominantly in older male smokers and do not seem to harbour epidermal growth factor receptor mutations, although other mutations, including mutations in KRAS, ALK1 and ROS1, have been isolated. Their behaviour is, as yet, unclear. Objective: Cancer stem cell markers are a group of pleuripotent cells actively dividing in an uncontrollable manner and are recognized by specific landmarks on their membrane as glycoprotein's or in the cytoplasm as enzymes or in the nucleus, e.g. ALDH1,CD-44, CD-133 etc. AIM-To detect CSC ALDH-1 in lung cancer and its clinicopathological correlation for prognostication. Method: Biopsies from 36 fresh previously untreated lung cancer patients visiting [ELMC&H & KGMU, Lucknow were taken. The biopsies were analyzed by using Haematoxylin and Immunohistochemistry for ALDH1 [Daco] . Results: In 36 samples analyzed, 35 were Non Small cell carcinoma [NSCLC] and 1 was Small cell carcinoma lung. On applying ALDH1 [IHC], 28 were positive (golden brown staining) and 08 were negative. Out of the 28 IHC positive cases all were NSCLC while out of the 08 negative cases 1 was SCLC and 07 NSCLC. Staging of lung cancer was performed in 29 out of the 36 positive cases. In the 29 cases staged, 68.9 % were in stage III+IV, 30.9 % in stage II+I. Seven cases could not be staged due to lack of CT findings. Objective: Pulmonary Hyalinizing Granuloma (PHG) is an uncommon lung disease suggested to be associated with exaggerated immune response to an antigenic stimuli. Method: We present the second case in the literature of PHG with Cattleman's Disease who was admitted with diarrhea and dry cough. Results: Radiological investigation of 20 years old male revealed bilateral multiple pulmonary nodules, mediastinal, hiler and mesenteric lymphadenomegalies. Histologic examination of pulmonary nodule and pre tracheal lymph nodule revealed PHG and Castleman's Disease, respectively. Conclusion: PHG can be misdiagnosed as metastasis or other benign diseases radiologically. Histopathologic evaluation should be performed for the correct diagnose of PHG and the associated immunological disease. E-PS-20-011 ALK gene rearrangements in non-small cell lung cancer Kazakhstan patients E. Satbayeva * , A. Altayeva, N. Artykbayeva, S. Esentayeva, G. Smagulova * Almaty, Kazakhstan Objective: Chromosomal rearrangements of ALK gene has been identified in 3.3 % of lung adenocarcinomas and define a distinct molecular subgroup of non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) that may benefit for available/investigational targeted therapies. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique is considered to be standard procedure for the evaluation of ALK gene translocations; however, immunohistochemistry (IHC) could be a promising alternative mode of screening for detection of mutant ALK protein. Method: A total of 46 NSCLC samples were tested for ALK protein expression using CD246 ALK antibody (ALK1 clone). All IHC strong positive cases have been screened with FISH to confirm probable rearrangement by using ALK Break Apart FISH Probe Kit. Results: Six adenocarcinomas (13 %) were identified with ALK immunoreactivity (H-score ≥ 100). Among these tumours, five showed predominantly solid pattern and in the remaining two-one was papillary pattern of growth. Concordance between IHC strong positive cases and FISH was 83.3 % (5 of 6). Conclusion: More sensitive, available and less expensive ALK IHC is recommended as screening. For All IHC positive cases to confirm ALK gene rearrangements FISH analysis is recommended. Proportion of patients with tumours positive ALK protein IHC and FISH is higher than in published data. Objective: Differential diagnosis between primary TTF-1 negative adenocarcinomas of the lung and metastatic ductal adenocarcinomas of the pancreas can be challenging. Therefore, we investigated the immunohistochemical expression of various mucins in resected primary adenocarcinomas of the lung and compared data to known expression patterns of mucins in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas. Method: We collected 215 cases of resected adenocarcinomas of the lung and explored the immunohistochemical expression of TTF-1, MUC1, MUC2, MUC4, MUC5AC and MUC6. Positive mucin expression was evaluated as percentage of positive cells and results were compared with positive or negative expression of TTF-1. Because up to 63 cases were not evaluable and due to the subsequent smaller sample size, statistical evaluation was limited and data was analyzed by descriptive means only. Analysis was performed by SPSS 21. Results: MUC1 was evaluable in 165 cases (100 %) and showed expression in all tumour cells in 86.7 % of cases (143/165). MUC2 was positive in 0.6 % (1/162). 17.9 % of the cases (27/151) were positive for MUC4 in all tumour cells and completely negative in 45 % of cases (68/151). Objective: A new WHO classification of lung neoplasms was launched in 2015. No grading system for lung adenocarcinoma (LA) is internationally accepted. We investigated the prognostic value of growth patterns, mitotic count, nuclear atypia, peritumoural lymphatic, vascular and airway spread, necrosis, the Kadota grading system and the modified Sica scoring system. Method: Between 2004 and 2013, 183 resected stage Ia LA could be matched with information on overall survival. The reviewed parameters were evaluated with Kaplan-Meier analysis, Log-Rank test, multivariate Cox regression and the ROC curve test. Results: Sensitivity (74-52 %) and specificity (44.7-57.5 %) were low for mitotic counts. Growth pattern (p = 0.038), nuclear atypia (p = 0.022), and vascular (p = 0.001) and airway (p = 0.038) spread were significant markers in the univariate model. We found no difference between low and intermediate grades in either the Kadota or the Sica system. By Cox regression, growth pattern (p = 0.001) and vascular invasion (p = 0.01) were independent prognostic markers. Conclusion: Growth pattern and vascular invasion were independent prognostic factors in stage Ia LA. A high mitotic rate does not necessarily confer bad prognosis. We suggest that LA grades should be assigned as low (in situ, minimally invasive, lepidic, acinar and papillary carcinoma) and high (solid and micropapillary). Objective: Pulmonary hypertension is a complex disease characterized by profound pulmonary artery adventitia (PA) remodeling. Our aim was to examine the hypothesis that fibro-proliferative and inflammatory changes of the PA adventitia are related to the presence of myofibroblast activation that induce Collagen V expression in a dependent IL-17 signaling manner. Method: Wister male rats were sacrificed 21 day after treatment with monocrotaline (MCT;n = 5) compared to controls (CTR;n = 5). Right ventricular pressure; HE and picrossirius red staining, immunohistochemistry for IL-17-related markers and "in situ" immunofluorescence for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and collagen types I and V, electron microscopy and fibronexus morphometry were used. Results: The right ventricular pressure and right cardiac hypertrophy index was higher in MCT than CTR group (p < 0,05). A significant increase of PA adventitia thickness (9-times vs CTR), total collagen (20 % vs CTR), collagen I (3-times × CTR), collagen V (4-times vs CTR), fibroblasts + SMA expression (2-times vs CTR), plasmatic membrane of myofibroblast (4-times more fibronexus vs CTR), IL-17, IL-6 and TNFβ were observed. Conclusion: Myofibroblast-mediated collagen V expression andTh-17 signaling downstream of IL-17 may hold therapeutic value for treatment of PH. E-PS-20-024 Mucoepidermoid carcinoma-a case report N. Derrabi * , F. Marnissi, M. Karkouri * Ibn Rochd University Hospital, Pathology Dept., Casablanca, Morocco Objective: Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) of the lung is a rare subtype of lung cancer that is sub-classified into low and high grade, based on histological features. We report the case of a 47 year old man. CT scan incidentally showed a cystic mass in favor of a hydatid cyst. The patient had a left upper lobectomy with lymph node dissection. Histological examination concluded mucoepidermoid carcinoma of low grade. Results: Mucoepidermoid carcinoma is a salivary gland-type tumour that consists of mucin-secreting cells, squamous or squamoid cells, and intermediate-type cells. About 50 % of the tumours occur in patients aged less than 30 years. There is no association with smoking. Computerized tomography of the chest shows a well-defined, centrally located endobronchial mass. A histopathological subclassification into lowgrade and high-grade types has been proposed. High grade tumours are rare, and the diagnosis should be determined after careful exclusion of adenosquamous carcinoma. A lack of TTF1 and napsin A in a MEC may also be useful for differential diagnosis. MAML2 rearrangement is exclusively seen in MEC. Conclusion: Primary pulmonary MEC represents a rare type of lung cancer. Patients with low-grade MECs, generally have a good prognosis after primary surgical resection. In contrast, high-grade pulmonary MECs are aggressive malignancies. Frequency and histopathological features of granulomas in resection specimens of lung tumours E. Bozkurtlar * , R. A. Ahiskali * Marmara University, Pathology, Istanbul, Turkey Objective: The incidence and significance of lung tumours is increasing in worldwide. Granulomas without any clinical signs or symptoms may be seen randomly in lymph nodes or lung parenchyma. This study aims to find frequency and histopathological features of granulomas within parenchyma and lymph nodes of resected lung tumours in our institution. Method: Of the 134 cases of resected lung tumours from the surgical database of our institution from 2011 to 2016, 15 cases had granulomas. H&E stained slides were evaluated to identify detailed histomorphological features of granulomas. Results: The patients were 4 females and 11 males ranging from 44 to 77 years (median 62 years). The diagnosis of lung tumours was adenocarcinoma (n = 7),squamous cell carcinoma (n = 3), large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (n = 2), pleomorphic carcinoma (n = 2),and atypical carcinoid (n = 1). All of the specimens had lymph node dissection. There were granulomas only in lymph nodes of 9 cases, only in parenchyma of 4 cases, and both in lymph nodes andadn parenchyma of 2 cases. Both granulomas and metastatic tumour were seen in same lymph node station in 1 case. Necrosis in granulomas was detected in 3 cases. Some of the granulomas of 2 cases had fibrosis. EZN stain was applied to 5 cases, one of them represented bacillus. Conclusion: Granulomas are identified in 11 % of our cases. The lymph nodes and parenchyma of the lung tumour specimens may contain granulomas which could be a sign of infectious or inflammatory pathology. Objective: Among rare forms of interstitial disseminated diseases of lungs, intravascular sclerogenic bronchoalveolar tumour is the most difficult for diagnostics; in majority of cases it is detected accidentally, which is caused by absence of pathognomonic clinical features. Method: Methods: histological material is obtained by minimally invasive videothoracoscopic access. Tinction with hematoxylin and eosin for Objective: Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma is a rare locally aggressive vascular tumour of intermediate malignancy. It occurs nearly exclusively during childhood. Adult cases have been reported recently. Method: A 36 year old woman that is presented with a superficial cutanous lesion on her arm. On histologic examination there is a tumoural lesion that was charachterized by vascular structure with irregularly shaped and randomly distributed. Some of the tumour cells were with vesicular and some of them were with hyperchromatic nucleus and with eosinophilic cytoplasm. Necrosis was not observed. There was only one mitosis in 10 HPF. In immunohistochemical staining, tumour cells were positive with CD34, CD31, SMA and were negative with HHV8. According to these histologic and immunohistochemical findings; our diagnosis was " kaposiform hemangioendothelioma". Results: Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma in adults are different from those in children. Although % 75 of kaposiform hemangioendothelioma presented with cutanous involvement, numerous anatomic location can be seen. Because of its invasive growth pattern and no-self healing tendency kaposiform hemangioendothelioma is classified as intermediate (borderline) malignancy. Conclusion: We are reporting this case because of its rarity in adults and also because of difficulties in differential diagnosis with other vascular tumours that have similiar histological features. Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcome A. Farida * * University of Sriwijaya, Dept. of Anatomic Pathology, Palembang, Indonesia Objective: Analyse undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS) case of a 6-years old boy admitted to the hospital, with mass on the right cheek as a chief complaint. One year ago he has an excision and an encapsulated, firm, size (4,5x3,5x2,5) cm, and gray-white mass were obtained. Method: Clinical data analysis, macroscopic, histophatologic and immunohistochemical examination. Results: The section revealed solid foci and variably gelatinous. Histological examination showed an uncircumscribed mass composed of spindle cells with pleomorphic nuclei, clumping chromatin, some are vesicular, some are coarse chromatin and had prominent nucleoli. The cells had eosinophilic and foamy cytoplasm. Other foci showed bizarre, binucleated or multinucleate tumour giant cells, some with excentric nuclei. Among the tumour cells, the wide fibrous tissue were noticed with hyalinisation and myxoid changes. Immunohistochemical examination revealed strong positivity of CD99 and vimentin, some cells showed middle positive for EMA and Desmin, patchy positive for EA1/3, negative for Myogenin, CD 34, and S100. Conclusion: we report a case of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. The final diagnosis were made based on clinical, macroscopic, histophatologic and immunohistochemical finding. Objective: Chondrolipoma is a rare form of lipoma showing cartilaginous metaplasia. It usually arise in the connective tissue of the skeletal system, breast, pharynx and nasopharynx. We report a case of chondrolipoma developing in the wrist. Method: The patient was a 58-year-old female with a slowly growing mass in the right wrist for 1 year. She suffered from seropositive rheumatoid arthritis, but did not complain of pain and any history of trauma. MRI study showed a 2.8 × 2.3 × 1.6 cm sized mass at the dorsomedial side of the right wrist joint, encased by extensor compartment 2 tendon. Signal changes were those of fat, and several nodules of T1 low and T2 intermediate to high signals were noted within the mass. Excision was done. Results: Grossly sections revealed yellow fatty surface with several white nodules. Histologically the tumour was composed of mature fat tissue with intervening fibrous tissue. Lipoblasts were absent. White nodule was mature hyaline cartilage, surrounded by thick fibrous tissue. Immunohistochemical examination for S-100 protein was positive to the fat cells and chondrocytes, but negative in the cartilage-covering fibrous tissue. The diagnosis of chondrolipoma was done. Conclusion: We report this case by its rarity, pathogenesis and differential points to chondroid lipoma, soft tissue chondroma and synovial chondromatosis. Objective: Phosphaturic mesenchymal tumour(PMT) is a rare soft-tissue neoplasm that results in tumour-induced osteomalacia. About 300 cases have been described in the literature, 16 located in the spine. Here we describe a spinal case. Method: A 37-year-old man presented with generalized joint pain and pathological fractures of right femoral neck and calcaneus. Laboratory investigations revealed hyphosphatemia, normocalcemia, low levels of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D and elevated levels of alkaline phosphate(AP). DXA scan showed a bone mineral density within the osteoporotic range. Thoracic CT scan disclosed a mass in L1 body and right vertebral pedicle. The lesion was biopsied and, subsequently, resected. Results: Histopathological examination revealed a tumour composed of bland spindle and epithelioid cells in a myxoid matrix. Thin-walled blood vessels were present, some with ectatic, tortuous outlines. Osteoclast-type giant cells and mature adipocytes were additionally found. Immunohistochemical staining was negative for pan-cytokeratins, CD34 and desmin and focally positive for SMA and S100 protein. PMT was diagnosed. After surgery, symptoms gradually improved and serum phosphorus and AP levels normalized. Conclusion: PMT is an important cause of osteomalacia in the adult and must be considered in the differential diagnosis. Recognition of its histological features is critical, as complete tumour resection leads to cure in most cases. Objective: The most common spinal disorder in elderly is lumbar spinal stenosis (LSS), resulting partly from ligamentum flavum (LF) hypertrophy. Its pathophysiology is not completely understood. The present study wants to elucidate the role of estrogen receptor (ER) in hypertrophied LF. Method: LF samples of 38 patients with LSS were obtained during spinal decompression. Twelve LF samples from patients with disk herniation served as controls. H&E and Elastica stains and immunohistochemistry for ER were performed. Proportion of fibrosis, loss and/or degeneration of elastic fibers and proliferation of collagen fibers were assessed according to the scores of Sairyo and Okuda. Group differences in ER, Sairyo and Okuda scores between patients and controls, additional orthopedic diagnoses and sex were assessed with the Mann-Whitney-U-test. Objective: Chordomas are rare, slowly growing neoplasms of bone that arise from embryonic remnants of the notochord. These tumours typically occur in the axial skeleton. Method: Between November 2015-April 2016, in our department, were rendered three new diagnoses of chordoma with sacral, intracanalar and skull base locations. The pacients were 42, 55 respectively 75-years-old, the oldest one being male. Results: In all of the three cases, the tissue fragments received had a white-gray colour and soft or elastic consistency. The tumour showed a lobular growth pattern of round to ovoid cells, with pale eosinophilic cytoplasm growing in cords and clusters in a basophilic myxoid stroma. Variable amount of phisaliphorous cells were present. Nuclei were generally small, cytologically bland, some of them indented by intracytoplasmatic vacuoles. Despite of bland morphology, significant infiltration of bone and/or adjacent soft tissue was noticed in each case; tumour cells were positive for AE1AE3, EMA, S100 and showed scarce positivity for Ki67, thus confirming the diagnosis. Conclusion: In spite of low grade appearance, chordoma is an aggressive lesion with high risk of local recurrences and metastastatic potential which has to be differentiated from other chordoid lesions, with different treatment and prognosis such as chordoid meningioma, chordoid glioma or metastatic carcinoma. Objective: Clear cell chondrosarcoma (CCC) is a rare variant of chondrosarcoma, most commonly encountered in the proximal part of the femur or humerus, being considered a low-grade malignancy with high survival rates comparing with chondrosarcoma or chondroblastic osteosarcoma. Method: We present the case of a 41-year-old man having a large femoral tumour proximally located. Surgical excision and total hip replacement was performed. Results: Resection specimen included an 11/8/4 cm tumour extending from the femoral head and greater trochanter to the upper portion of the diaphysis. Histopathology revealed groups of cells with round, hypertrophic, centrally located nuclei, some with prominent single/multiple nucleoli, clear/pale-pink cytoplasm and distinct cytoplasmatic membranes. Cartilaginous areas and numerous woven bone trabeculae with osteoclast-like giant cells were present. Mitotic figures were rare. Tumour cells were positive for S100 and negative for AE1AE3, SMA and CD34, thus supporting the chondroblastic origin of the tumour. Based on morphology and immunophenotype a final diagnosis of CCC was established. Conclusion: Differential diagnosis of CCC imply exclusion of several entities belonging to various spectrum of diseases such as chondrosarcoma, chondroblastic osteosarcoma, chondroblastoma, osteoblastoma and metastatic clear cell renal carcinoma. Correct diagnosis is mandatory since CCC has a better prognosis than others malignancies with similar morphology. E-PS-21-020 Key microscopic findings for distinguishing benign notochordal cell tumour from chordoma T. Yamaguchi * , H. Imada, S. Iida, A. Fujii, Y. Ono, S. Ban, Y. Ueda * Koshigaya Hosp, Dokkyo Med Uni, Pathology, Japan Objective: The concept of benign notochord cell tumour (BNCT) was established recently and BNCT was listed on WHO classification of bone tumours in 2013. It is still challenging to distinguish precisely between BNCT and well differentiated chordoma because their histologic findings are quite similar each other. To know morphologic key features for distinguishing BNCT from chordoma we examined their histologic sections and then tried to differentiate between BNCT and chordoma components in lesions that are diagnosed "chordoma arising in BNCT" on imaging study. Method: HE-stained sections of BNCTs and chordomas found in our file were carefully examined under microscope. Results: Histologic findings of BNCT and well differentiated chordoma overlapped. BNCT-like components in chordoma, however, made a transition to typical chordoma histology and chordoma shows fine fibrous capsules and/or septa with/without vasculature in addition to lobular architecture, intercellular myxoid matrix, and bone destruction. Hence, the border of chordoma seems very smooth. In contrast, the border of BNCT seems slightly zigzag along the contour of adjacent marrow adipocytes. aim of this case report was to evaluate the histopathological and immunohistochemical features of these rare tumours. Method: We present the case of a 71-year-old man with a left testicular mass measuring 4.5 cm. Under the assumption of a testicular malignant tumour inguinal orchiectomy was performed. Results: Histopathological examination revealed testicular parenchyma presenting a cystic lession with intracystic blunt papillae lined by columnar epithelium, with hyperchromatic nuclei, areas of hobnail cells and very rare mitoses. A focus of microinvasion was present. The underlying stroma had a fibrilar ovarian-like aspect. Immunohistochemistry showed the expression of CK7, EMA, PLAP, WT1, CA 125 and ER, while Calretinin was positive in isolated cells, and CEA, MOC 31, CK20 were negative. Ki-67 value was 10 %. Final diagnosis was serous papillary tumour of the testis with low malignant potential-ovarian type. Conclusion: Serous papillary tumour of ovarian-type in the testis should be considered when the diagnosis of malignant mesothelioma is suspected. The microscopic appearance combined with the immunoprofile of the tumours are helpful for differential diagnosis. Objective: The tumour microenvironment comprises numerous signaling molecules and pathways that influence the angiogenic response. As angiogenesis is essential for tumour growth and metastasis, controlling tumour-associated angiogenesis is a promising tactic in limiting cancer progression. WT1 is an important regulator of cancer growth via modulation of tumour vascularization. Method: A tissue microarray with 48 different cases of clear cell renal cell carcinomas (CCRCC) was performed with respective normal renal tissue as controls. Tumoural angiogenesis was assessed by immunohistochemical studies against WT1 and CD31 molecules (a reliable endothelial marker) (Roche). Samples were imaged using a 40X objective lens. ImageJ, a digital image analysis software, was used to quantify the percentage of positivity. Results: A strong WT-1 cytoplasmic stain was invariably observed in the endothelial cells from all cases and controls. None of cases showed WT1 in tumoural cells. Angiogenesis was significant observed in cases against controls by WT1 and CD31 expression. A strong correlation was found between WT1 and CD31 expression. No significant associations were determined between clinical variables and angiogenesis in CCRCC. Conclusion: WT1 is a reliable marker for angiogenesis. There is a strong correlation between WT1 and CD31 expression. Angiogenesis is not associated with clinical variables in CCRCC. Primary renal Ewing sarcoma / primitive neuroectodermal tumour: A case report F. Santos * , R. Cabrera * Instituto Portugues de Oncologia de Lisboa, Dept. de Anatomia Patológica, Portugal Objective: Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumour (ES/ PNET) belongs to a group of small round cell tumours defined by alterations in the EWSR1 gene. Primary renal ES/PNET is uncommon and has worse prognosis than ES/PNET arising in other sites. We present a case of primary renal ES/PNET and discuss its clinicopathological features. Method: A case of primary renal ES/PNET is described, with a review of the literature. A 39-year-old female underwent nephrectomy for a 13 cm mass in the inferior pole of the right kidney. Grossly, the tumour was a wellcircumscribed, solid and cystic mass with extensive necrosis. Microscopically it was composed of sheets of small cells with round nuclei, fine chromatin and scant cytoplasm, with occasional peritheliomatous growth. Immunohistochemistry showed strong membrane positivity for CD99. Rearrangements of the EWSR1 gene were found by fluorescence in situ hybridization, confirming the diagnosis of renal ES/PNET. The patient was treated with post-operative chemotherapy and no evidence of disease was found after 2 years of follow-up. Conclusion: Although rare, primary ES/PNET represents a diagnostic challenge and should be considered in the differential diagnosis of renal malignancies in young adults. Complementary studies are fundamental to differentiate it from similar renal small cell tumours, like blastematous nephroblastoma or neuroblastoma. Objective: We report a case of myxoid chondrosarcoma in 67 years old man presented with 6 cm penile mass. Method: After radical penectomy, specimen was handled in usual fashion manner. Pathohistological examination was performed by H&E staining, histochemical and immunohistochemical studies. Results: Diagnosis was made on a morphologic basis, proven by the histochemical and immunohistochemical studies. Morphologically, tumour consisted of pleomorphic cells with large, hyperchromatic nuclei and myxoid stroma positive for Acian blue. Immunohistochemical studies showed malignant cells positive for Vimentin, Alfa SMA, NSE, Synaptophysin, S-100, EMA, and negative for CKAE1/3, CD34, CD31, CD68, CD57, Desmin, HMB45, ALK1. Conclusion: Exstrasceletal myxoid chondrosarcoma of the penis is very rare tumour. This case presents that an exstrasceletal chondrosarcoma shows ultrastructural evidence of neuroendocrine differentiation and neuroendocrine immunophenotype. Nevertheless, surgery is the main treatment modality, but the prognosis is poor. Primary renal well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumour: A case report M. Cardoso * , A. Pignatelli, T. Oliveira, C. Ferreira * Hospital Santa Maria, Dept. de Anatomia Patológica, Lisboa, Portugal Objective: We present a primary well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumour of the kidney, which is an exceedingly rare entity and frequently misdiagnosed as other kidney cancers. The behavior of this tumour is not well known due to the small number of reported cases. Method: A 52-year-old woman presents with an incidental finding of a mass in the left kidney. Results: We received a radical nephrectomy specimen with a 6,2 cm well defined tumour. Histologically it was composed of nests and trabeculae of cells with round nuclei with salt and pepper chromatin. Immunohistochemically the cells were positive for cytokeratins AE1 / AE3 and 8/18, CD56, chromogranin, synaptophysin; they were negative for CDX-2 and TTF-1. Of the 15 lymph nodes found, four had metastasis. Conclusion: Neuroendocrine carcinomas may originate in a wide variety of organs, including those that do not usually contain neuroendocrine cells. To the best of our knowledge, less than 100 cases of well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumours of renal origin have been reported in the literature. Patients with advanced disease have been known to survive for long periods of time even E-PS-23-023 Renal mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma combined with papilary renal cell carcinoma, type I-one tumour or two? A case report J. Soukup * , M. Podhola * University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Dept. of Pathology, Czech Republic Objective: Mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinoma (MTSCC) is an unusual tumour of kidney. Cases of MTSCC combined with papillary renal cell carcinoma type I. (PRCC-T1) has been described, bringing into question relationship of both entities. Here we present an additional case. Method: A 62-year-old lady underwent nephrectomy for left kidney tumour measuring 60 × 50 × 50 mm. Five smaller tumours up to 13 mm and several serous cysts up to 30 mm were scattered around main tumour. Histopathological evaluation and immunohistochemical staining for CK18, CD10, RCC and AMACR was performed. Results: The largest tumour was predominantly PRCC-T1, WHO/ISUP grade 3, with areas of necrosis and papillary, tubular or solid architecture. There was second component of the tumour composed of uniform spindle cells intermingled with cords or small tubules of cuboidal cells. Cells were embedded in myxoid, Alcian-blue positive matrix; a finding consistent with diagnosis of MTSCC (WHO/ISUP grade 3). Transition between both tumours was apparent focally. There was strong positivity of RCC and weak expression of CK18 in PRCC-T1 component, contrasting with no expression of RCC and strong positivity of CK18 in MTSCC component. PRCC-T1 was strongly positive for AMACR, while MTSCC component stained only weakly in focal pattern. CD10 expression was negative. Smaller tumours in surroundings were papillary adenomas without any remarkable features. Conclusion: MTSCC and PRCC-T1 may share morphological and immunohistochemical features. Although rare, the tumours with both morphologic components are described. The data from previous genetic studies reported in literature suggests that at least a part of such cases are rather PRCC-T1 with unusual growth pattern than real collision tumour. Objective: The present study aimed to assess changes in tumour grade, size, and pT in resampling of initial tumours as residual and recurrent tumours. Method: This study was conducted on 154 patients with bladder cancer who referred to Hasheminejad Kidney Center from 2003 to 2011. Residual and recurrent tumours were considered as the presence of tumour in second TUR-B specimens performed within 8 weeks after the first one and more than 8 weeks respectively. Results: The grade of tumour in 7.7 % of residual and 17.6 % of recurrent tumours changed from low to high. Increasing the primary tumour size from less than 3 cm to more was found in 15.4 % and 13.2 % of residual and recurrent tumours. Changing pTa to pT1 occurred in 6.8 %, pTa to pT2 in 3.4 % and pT1 to pT2 in 10.2 % of residual tumours. Also in recurrent tumours changing pTa to pT1 occurred in 12.1 %, pTa to pT2 in 1.5 % and pT1 to pT2 in 6 %. Conclusion: There is a possibility of changing the grade, size and pT in residual tumours because of incomplete sampling. The grade change in recurrent tumours may be due to new mutations and changes in size and pT indicate tumour progression. Objective: Benign intratesticular fibrous proliferations are rare and most arise from the paratesticular region. Testicular fibroma of gonadal stromal origin is much more rarer. According to the recent WHO classification they are classified under the sex cord/gonadal stromal tumour. The tumour presents as slow-growing, sometimes painful mass which is not associated with hormonal alteration. Method: A 52-year old male presented with scrotal pain lasting for 1 month. There was no history of trauma, urologic or hormonal symptoms. The ultrasonography revealed mildly heterogeneous wellcircumscribed mass in the left testis. The patient underwent left radical orchiectomy. Macroscopic examination showed testicular paranchymal mass measuring 2.1 × 1.5 × 1.5 cm which has white solid cut surface. Microscopically the tumour composed of uniform bland spindle cells within collagenous stroma. The mitotic activity was 0-1/10 HPF. Atypia and necrosis were absent. There was no associated minor sex cord elements. Immunohistochemically tumour cells were positive with SMA and vimentin, very focally positive with S-100, CD99 and CD34. Desmin and inhibin were negative. The Ki67 proliferating index was %1. Results: Histopathologic diagnosis was testicular fibroma. Conclusion: Testicular fibroma of gonadal stromal origin is a rare benign neoplasm which must be kept in mind in the differential diagnosis of benign intratesticular fibrous proliferations. Nephrogenic adenoma: A report of three cases E. Aleksoska * , V. Janevska, S. Saidi, O. Ivanovski * Faculty of Medicine Skopje, Institute of Pathology, Republic of Macedonia Objective: Nephrogenic adenoma of the urinary bladder (UB) is a rare lesion associated with nonspecific symptoms and may microscopically be confused with many malignant lesions of the UB. We present three cases of nephrogenic adenoma of UB. Method: Three male patients underwent transurethral resection (TUR) of a previous confirmed bladder mass in two cases and urethral mass in one case, by imaging techniques. Standard procedure for histopathologycal analysis and immunohistochemistry was performed. Results: Two of the patients had previous history of chronic infection and one of them had previous prostatectomy. Two of them presented with dysuria and urinary frequency and the third patient had hematuria. One surgical specimen (utehral one) was a polipod lesion with diameter of 1,3 cm, and the another two consisted of urinary "chips" from bladder TUR. Microscopically small tubules, looking similar to mesonepric tubules, lined by a single layer of bland cuboidal cell with clear cytoplasm ant small nuclei were found. In one case some of the tubules were cysticaly dilated and some contained basophilic secretion. The stroma was edematous and rich of inflammatory cells. All three cases were CK7, EMA and PAX 2 positive. Conclusion: The accurate diagnosis of nephrogenic adenoma is important because it can mimic malignant lesions. E-PS-23-027 Two rare paediatric renal tumours mimicking Wilms' tumour of the kidney F. Oz Puyan * , N. Can, E. Tastekin, U. N. Basaran, T. Eren, H. Genchallac, A. K. Kutlu * Trakya University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Pathology, Edirne, Turkey unusual for a bladder cancer, but suggestive of a testicular seminoma, immunohistochemistry was performed. Results: Tumour cells expressed PLAP, CD117, OCT4, and were negative for CK7, CK20, p63. The morphological features and the immunohistochemical profile led to a diagnosis of TS metastasis in the bladder. Reviewing the medical history, we found that 2 years before the patient had undergone orchiectomy for pure seminoma with multiple metastases. During this period the patient was lost of view. Conclusion: Although very rare, metastases of TS in the bladder should be kept in mind when facing a bladder tumour with unusual morphology. In our case, the patients' medical history prompted to differentiate between a TS metastasis in the bladder and an extragonadal seminoma. Objective: Post-transplantation Kaposi sarcoma is a well known complication due to the immunosuppressive agents. It is mainly seen in the skin but rarely visceral organs are also affected like lung, liver, gastrointestinal tract and lymph nodes. However there are only 4 cases of Kaposi sarcoma originated from the ureter in the literature. Method: A 52 years old man received a lived related kidney transplantation from his brother in our hospital. Hydronephrosis was seen at the transplant kidney with the USG after 10 months. MRI showed lymph nodes around the ureter and surgery was done for tissue diagnosis. After the diagnosis of mesenchymal tumour with intraoperative frozen section, that part of ureter was resected. Results: Microscopic examination revealed a spindle cell neoplasm under the epithelium of the ureter. The tumour was composed of nodules of spindle cells and slit-like vascular spaces with erythrocytes. The mitotic activity was increased also. Immunohistrochemistry showed positive staining with vimentin, Fli-1, CD31, ERG and HHV-8. On the other hand keratin, EMA, S-100, desmin and CD34 were negative. Kaposi sarcoma was diagnosed according to the histological and immunohistochemical features. Conclusion: Post transplant Kaposi sarcoma of the ureter is extremely rare and must be kept in mind that can arise even at the visceral organs. Objective: Primitive neuroectodermal tumour (PNET) of kidney is a rare neoplasm with aggressive behavior and poor prognosis. Correct diagnosis leads to proper therapy. Method: We report a 21 year old man complaining of right flank pain and gross hematuria. Microscopic examination of H&E slides, IHC studies and PCR study of paraffin embedded blocks are evaluated. Results: CT scan revealed right renal mass. Microscopic examination of renal mass biopsy showed a small round cell tumour. IHC studies showed negative immune reactions for CK7, CK20, CD56, chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD45, CD3 and CD 20 but NSE and CD99 were positive in tumoural cells. Real time PCR on paraffin block proved the presence of t (11-22) translocation (EWS-FL1 fusion transcript) which confirmed the diagnosis of PNET. The patient underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy and radical nephrectomy. Microscopic examination of radical nephrectomy showed only therapy related changes with no tumour residue. The patient is symptom-free until now. Conclusion: Only two cases of renal PNET were previously reported from Iran. Macroscopically many of the cases are located in the medullary/pelvic region like. For definite diagnosis, IHC studies are required which show more than 90 % positivity for CD99. Cytogenetic analyses can be helpful showing EWS gene and ETS translocation. The nested variant of the urothelial carcinoma: A case report P. Karabagli * , T. Gurcan * Selcuk University, Dept. of Pathology, Konya, Turkey Objective: The nested variant of urothelial carcinoma is rare neoplasm that is characterized by irregular nests and/or tubules of mildly atypical urothelial cells infiltrating the lamina propria and/or muscularis propria. Method: A case of the nested variant of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder is presented with differential diagnosis. Results: A 50-year-old man presented with hematuria. Physical examination no abnormal findings. Cystoscopic examination revealed that trigone, and right lateral wall of the bladder were replaced by mass approximately 3,5 cm in diameter. The tumour was macroscopically resected. Microscopically, tumour cells are infiltrated into part of the mucosal urothelium, lamina propria, and muscularis propria. Few mitotic figures were seen. Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells showed diffuse CK 7, and focal CK20 expression. Chromogranin was not expressed. After a follow up period for 6 months the patient free from recurrence. Conclusion: Nested variant of urothelial carcinoma must be differentiated from the benign proliferative lesions of urothelium, such as von brunn nests, cystitis cystica and glandularis, nephrogenic metaplasia, inverted papilloma and paraganglioma. Despite its bland cytological features it behaves aggressively with invasion, metastasis and death being common. Objective: Endometriosis is the presence of functional endometroid tissue in ectopic foci outside of uterine cavity. Extragenital endometriosis rarely involves the urınary system. It ıs usually diagnosed in women aged between 30 and 35 years. İt is uncommon and even more likely to remain undiagnosed in postmenopausal women. Method: A 51-year-old postmenopasual woman, presented with pelvic pain worsening in the last 6 months. The gynecological examination was not remarkable. She was diagnosed with severe left hydronephrosis and hydroureter secondary to left ureteral obstruction resulting in 20 % left renal function. Computer tomography mass in left urethral distal segment with homogenous contrast uptake that appeared postcontrast series. cystoscopy in the left ureter, 3-cm polypoid mass was seen which fills the lumen. A cold cup biopsy was taken. Results: Histopathological examination; of biopsy specimen revealed benign endometrial gland and stroma underlining the normal urothelium. Immunohistochemical studies were performed for estrogen receptor, CK7, CK20 and CD10. The endometrial glands were positive for Estrogen receptore and CK7 while the endometrial stroma was positive for CD10. Ck20 stainingn not observed. Conclusion: Urinary tract endometriosis is observed in 1-2 % of women with endometriosis. Ureteral involvment may lead to obstruction progressive hydroureteronephrosis and renal loss. Polypoid endometriosis is a rare manifestation of endometriosis that may be mistaken for a neoplasm on clinical, intraoperative, or pathologic assessment. Objective: PEComas are rare mesenchymal tumours composed of cells that express both myogenic and melanocytic markers making their diagnosis difficult. The urinary bladder is an extremely rare location for PEComa. The association of urinary bladder PEComa with another type of mesenchymal tumour is quite unusual. The aim of the present paper is to present a rare case of PEComa of the urinary bladder in a patient previously diagnosed with gastric GIST. Method: A 66 years-old woman, with multiple comorbidities, including a gastric polypoid tumour (in 2004), was admitted in the hospital for investigation of an incidentally discovered bladder tumour. Results: The 12 mm resected bladder tumour with mesenchymal appearance on routine stain presented the following IHC profile: positive reaction for HMB45 and SMA, lack of reactivity for CK, EMA, S100, Des, ALK, CD117 and CD34. The resected gastric tumour (2004) was diffusely and strongly positive for CD117 and CD34. The patient remained disease-free 6 month after surgery for bladder lesion with no evidence of tumour recurrence or new neoplasms. Conclusion: Mesenchymal tumours detected metachronously in patients with history of GIST should be evaluated in order to confirm or to exclude metastatic GISTs, but may represent distinct lesions. The possibility, although very rare, of a urinary bladder PEComa should be considered and as a consequence a wide IHC panel must be performed in order to avoid erroneous diagnosis. Objective: Primitive neuroectodermal tumours (PNETs) are a group of small round cell tumours and presumed to be of neural-crest origin. PNET can rarely arise outside the nervous system except for bone and soft tissue. The kidney is a rare primary location for these tumours and approximately 50 cases of renal PNET (rPNET) have been reported in the literature. We describe a case of rPNET and review its clinical and histologic features. Method: The surgical specimens were formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded. The sections were stained with routinary H&E. Immunohistochemistry was performed. Results: The patient was 50-year-old man and underwent left radical nephrectomy. On gross examination, the tumour measured 6 × 5 cm in dimensions, with cystic areas and necrosis. Microscopically tumours consisted of small sized, round-oval shaped primitive cells with irregular nuclei and scanty cytoplasm, and presented rosette formation in some areas. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for vimentin and MIC-2(CD99). Microscopic and immunohistochemical findings were compatible with rPNET. Conclusion: Though a rare entity, due to its aggressive nature rPNET should be included in the differential diagnosis of renal tumours especially in children and young adults. Correlation of AMACR and ERG expression with preoperative PSA levels and morphological features of the prostate cancer V. Zakharava * , T. Liatkouskaya, E. Cherstvoy * Objective: To study a correlation of AMACR and ERG expression with PSA levels and morphological features of the prostate cancer. Method: We studied a material of needle biopsy and radical prostatectomy from 702 prostate cancer patients (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) . The expression of AMACR and ERG was estimated with the use of immunostaining. For the statistical analysis the software Statistica8.0 and MedCalc12.4.0 was used. Results: The correlation of preoperative PSA levels with Gleason first component and Gleason score on needle biopsy and with Gleason score and TNM parameters in radical prostatectomy was identified. However, dispersive analysis didn't reveal significant differences of prostate cancer morphological features in patients groups with threshold values (ng/mL) PSA < 1, PSA = 1-4 and PSA > 4. ERG expression was detected only in cases with a PSA > 4. But the significant correlation of AMACR and ERG expression, PSA level and morphological features wasn't identified in radical prostatectomy material. A high PSA level was an important factor of tumour spread prognosis. So, PSA levels ≥16,08 ng/mL predicted a high risk of extraprostatic invasion and PSA ≥ 26,75 and ≥29,85 ng/ml-the presence of lymph node and distant metastases, respectively. Conclusion: Preoperative PSA levels correlated with Gleason score and TNM and had an important clinical significance as a prediction factor of extraprostatic invasion and metastasis . At the same time, prostate cancer from patients with PSA ≤ 4 ng/mL was ERG-negative, but wasn't a less aggressive compared with that from patients with PSA > 4 ng/ml by morphological features. Objective: Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) is a malignant mesenchymal neoplasm thought to have originated from smooth muscle. They account for approximately 7 % of soft tissue malignancies. LMS's are generally seen in middle-aged and elderly patients, often located in uterus or gastrointestinal organs and constitute the majority of sarcomas developing from large vessels in the retroperitoneum. Male genitourinary LMS's are rare. We report an unusual case of scrotal leiomyosarcoma. Method: A 62 year old male presented with mass in the right scrotum. Clinical preoperative findings were consistent with lipoma. An exicisional biopsy was performed. Macroscopically there was solid nodular mass with 2.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm dimensions. Cut surface was yellow in color with centrally creamy white area. In the microscopical examination, the lesion was a mesenchymal neoplasm composed of spindle cells with cigar shaped nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. There were nuclear pleomorphism and focal necrosis. Neoplastic cells displayed diffuse smooth muscle actin and caldesmon expression immunohistochemically. Desmin and EMA were focally positive. Stains for Pan-cytokeratin, S-100, CD34 and CD68 were negative. Ki-67 proliferation index was 50 %. Results: The final diagnosis was high grade LMS. Conclusion: LMSs can lead to significant clinical difficulty due to its wide differential diagnosis and rarity. Objective: Hemangiopericytoma (HPC) classified as a soft-tissue vascular tumour arising from pericytes, which arranged around capillaries and postcapillary venules and modulate blood flow and permeability. Consequently, HPC may occur anywhere capillaries found. Renal HPC was uncommon and to the date, only 2 cases of bilateral metastatic renal HPC have reported. A considerable proportion of patients exhibits hypertension, hypoglycemia or additional paraneoplastic syndromes. Method: We report an uncommon case of bilateral metastatic renal HPC accompanying hypoglycemia and hypertension in a 52-year-old male. He had a history of mandibular HPC, and subsequent lung metastasis noted include bilateral renal HPC 5 years after initial presentation. Results: To our knowledge, this is the third reported case of bilateral metastatic renal HPC. After bilateral nephrectomy and the complete resection of the tumour the patient's blood pressure and blood glucose level returned to normal also with the influence of chemotherapy. During 2 years after surgery and chemotherapy, the patient had no evidence of hypertension and hypoglycemia. Whereas after 3 years the patient had come with stubborn hypoglycemia. Radiologic examination of the whole body revealed multiple metastasis both in liver and lung. Therefore, pazopanib therapy given to the patient for tumour recurrence and steroid therapy added for the control of stubborn hypoglycemia. The patient died 1 year after the second recurrence of the disease. Conclusion: The present case indicated that surgery with chemotherapy provides satisfactory outcomes and appears to control the paraneoplastic syndromes in renal HPC. Furthermore, the present case showed the strong effect of corticosteroid therapy, which ameliorated symptoms of hypoglycemia. Objective: To review a peculiar reaction in urinary bladder associated with inflammatory changes and poorly understood pathogenesis, developing benign glandular foci of metaplastic prostatic tissue. Method: Two cases of prostatic metaplasia of the urinary bladder were studied from a males of 37 and 68 years of age. Both were located at the dome of the bladder, with a size of 4 and 3 mm. One of them was closely situated to a small foci of superficial papillary urotelial carcinoma. Immunohistochemical studied was perform to assess the prostatic nature of the lesions. Results: Lesions were composed by closely packed glandular acini lined with two cell types, flat basal cells and cylindrical luminal cells. Nearby von Brunn nest could be seen and a glandular change evolving into the clearly developed prostatic glands. Prostate specific antigen (PSA) was intensely positive, with p63 expression in basal layer. Cytokeratin 7 and 20 expression was seen with heterogeneous pattern. Alpha-methylacyl-CoA-racemase was weakly positive in one case. Conclusion: A few cases of ectopic prostatic tissue are describe in bladder wall. The metaplastic change we present in transition with inflammatory reaction and von Brun nests is probably an underreported change similar to the other metaplastic lesions commonly seen in the bladder. Results: A 52-year-old woman consulted for a right low back pain, without palpable mass. CT scan showed an adrenal well limited mass, measuring 11 cm which wasn't secreting on biology. The patient underwent a right adrenalectomy. At macroscopic examination, the mass was a well limited and encapsulated with a fleshy texture. It was lobulated and showed edematous, congestive and necrotic changes. Histological examination revealed a well-demarcated proliferation made of fairly monomorphic spindle cells arranged in short bundles or sometimes storiform and often without particular organization. The general appearance is heterogeneous with presence of densely cellular territories, alternating abruptly with less cellular territories of hyaline fibrosis or edematous or myxoid areas. The set is supplied by a vascular network where branched vessels sometimes adopting a staghorn morphology. There wasn't a significant pleomorphism or mitotic activity. The necrosis was rather ischemic. By immunohistochemistry, tumour cells expressed intensely and diffusely CD34. Conclusion: The clinical course of SFTs has always been a problem. The malignancy criteria vary depending on the series and tumour location. The pleomorphism, hypercellularity and mitotic index (>4 mitoses per 10GCF) are mainly the indicators of a poor prognosis. Metastasis of colorectal carcinoma to kidney with in-situ growth pattern mimicking primary renal/urothelial neoplasm J. Soukup * , M. Podhola * University Hospital Hradec Kralove, Dept. of Pathology, Czech Republic Objective: Metastasesofcancertokidneyareunusualfinding.Herewereport a case of metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma with in situ involvement of renal pelvis mucosa and collecting ducts thus simulating collecting duct carcinoma or primary enteric type adenocarcinoma arising in urothelium. Method: A 61-year-old man with history of colorectal cancer underwent nephrectomy for left kidney tumour measuring 20 mm in diameter. Tumour involved cortex and medulla. Histopathological evaluation and immunohistochemical staining for CK7, CK20, CDX2, PAX8, betacatenin and GATA3 was performed. Results: The tumour was composed of well-formed or cribriform glands of intestinal type adenocarcinoma and invaded cortex and medulla. Desmoplastic stroma and areas of necrosis were apparent. The tumour grew underneath urothelium or lined focally pelvic mucosa with abrupt transition to the normal urothelium. Some renal tubules were lined with dysplastic columnar epithelium, resembling in-situ carcinoma. There was expression of CK20, CDX2 and beta-catenin (weak membranous positivity) in the main tumour, in-situ tubular component and tumoural lining of the pelvis. PAX8 and CK7 was expressed in surrounding renal tubules or urothelium, no expression in tumour nor in situ component was seen. GATA3 was expressed in urothelial lining of the pelvis only. The diagnosis of metastatic colorectal carcinoma was established, excluding the possibility of collecting duct carcinoma or primary enteric type adenocarcinoma arising in urothelium. Conclusion: It is important to remember the possible involvement of preexisting epithelial structures in metastatic cancer. Such a finding may mislead the diagnosis and falsely point to primary cancer of the involved organ-in our particular case the kidney. Objective: Amyloidosis is a disorder with mainly extracellular deposition of misfolded protein. It can be primary, secondary or hereditary and the deposits can be systemic or localized. Amyloidosis of the bladder is a rare condition and generally localized. It mimics urothelial carcinoma clinically, cystoscopically, and radiologically. Method: 63 years old woman was admitted to our hospital with macroscopic hematuria in 2013. On computed tomography, posterolateral and superior part of the bladder wall showed 2 cm thickness which was suspicious for tumour. Cystoscopy showed irregulary areas in the posterolateral side of the bladder. Curetted material was obtained by transurethral resection of bladder. Results: Biopsies revealed dense homogenous eosinophillic material in the lamina propria which stained orange red on congo red stain and showed apple green birefringence on polarization. There was no evidence of urothelial carcinoma or carcinoma insitu. There were no signs of systemic amyloidosis at the time of diagnosis and during the 36 months of follow-up. Conclusion: Amyloidosis of the bladder is a rare condition which can be easily confused with urothelial carcinoma because of its appearance on imaging as well as on cystoscopy. Histological examination is a requirement for definitive diagnosis. Objective: Mantle cell lymphoma of the prostate, primary or secondary, is rare. Less than a hundred cases have been reported in the literature. This scarcity is causing the delay in diagnosis usually done at the advanced stage of the tumour. Method: We report the case of a 67 year old man with no medical history, the history of his symptoms back to 4 months before admission by the installation of dysuria. Ultrasound revealed a prostatic hypertrophy. The patient had a resection by bladder size. Histological examination concluded prostatic localization of a mantle cell lymphoma, confirmed by immunohistochemical study. Results: Mantle cell lymphoma of the prostate is often discovered incidentally at autopsy or after surgery. The primary involvement of the prostate is rarely reported unlike secondary locations. The average age is 62 years. The clinical symptoms are nonspecific. Imaging is also nonspecific. The diagnosis is histological based on prostate biopsy. This is a malignant non-Hodgkin lymphoma Small cell, cells are monomorphic with sometimes indented nuclei. Tumour cells usually express CD20, CD5 and Cyclin-D1. Conclusion: The prostate localization of mantle cell lymphoma is unusual and rare. Therapeutic consensus is not established. In first line, the teams propose chemotherapy in combination or not with radiotherapy. Objective: Primary T-cell lymphoma of male urethra is an extremely rare location for this type of cancer. We report the case of a 68 years old male patient who presented to the hospital with urinary obstruction symptoms that started 2 months prior. Clinical exam describes an urethral obstructive mass. Therefore, segmental penile urethrectomy is performed. Method: Surgical specimen was grossly examined and processed in the pathology department. Hematoxylin eosin and van Gieson colored slides were examined under the microscope. CD3, CD25, CD30, CD20 and Tdt markers were used for immunohistochemistry study. Results: Histopathology exam reveals a diffuse neoplastic proliferation with lymphoid features. The cells are medium sized, pleomorphic with vesicular nuclei, 2-3 small nucleoli and high mitotic index. The tumour involves male urethra and infiltrates cavernous bodies. The patient doesn't complaints about other signs and symptoms. Lab and imagistic results are within normal range. Tumour cells are positive for CD3 and CD25, with negative results for CD 30 and Tdt. Conclusion: Primary T-cell lymphoma of male urethra is a rare form of cancer with less than 5 cases reported in the literature. The tumour is extremely aggressive and can extend to the surrounding structures in a short period of time stressing the need for prompt diagnosis and therapy. E-PS-23-049 Adrenal myelolipoma: A study of five cases A. Sassi * , A. Zhani, I. Chelly, B. Chelly, H. Azzouz, Y. Nouira, S. Haouet, N. Kchir * CHU La Rabta, Pathology, Tunis, Tunisia Objective: Adrenal myelolipoma (ML) is a rare benign tumour, which is usually incidentally discovered. It was first described by Gierke in 1905. It represents 5 % of all adrenal gland tumours. It is composed of mature adipose tissue and bone marrow elements. ML is usually unilateral and rarely bilateral. Method: We report five cases of adrenal ML over 10 years from 2006 to 2016. A retrospective study was done by reviewing medical records. Demographic, imaging and clinicopathologic features are presented. Results: All patients were women. The mean age was 45 years, with ages ranging from 23 to 59 years. Four patients were diagnosed incidentally with a unilateral ML. The fifth patient presented bilateral ML revealed by flank pain. Initial diagnosis was based on imagery. All patients underwent a surgical resection. Definitive diagnosis was made by pathologic findings that showed adrenal gland tumour comprising mature adipose tissue with bone marrow elements. Follow-up of all patients showed no recurrence. Conclusion: The origin of ML remains unclear. Some theories have been discussed, including remnants of foetal bone marrow or misplaced haematopoietic cells. It is confirmed by histopathologic examination. Surgery becomes necessary for symptomatic cases or large tumours that cannot be reliably diagnosed. Primary sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma of the kidney in a young patient: Case report and review of the literature G. Esteves * , R. Cabrera, S. Bezerra * IPO de Lisboa, Anatomia Patológica, Portugal Objective: Primary sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma of the kidney (PSEFK) is a recently described neoplasm occurring in a wide range of ages. We describe a case of a 12-year-old girl in which the diagnosis was difficult, mostly due to the age of presentation and unfamiliarity with the entity. Method: The clinicopathological features of a case of PSEFK are described, with a review of the literature. Results: A 12-year-old girl underwent nephrectomy for a 5 cm right renal tumour. Grossly, it was firm and well circumscribed. Histologically it was a spindle and epithelioid cell tumour with eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm, moderate atypia and a densely hyalinised stroma with entrapped hyperplastic renal tubules. Mesoblastic nephroma and mixed epithelial-stromal tumour were considered initially, but upon review of the literature, PSEFK was recognized as the most likely diagnosis. Positivity for MUC4 and the presence of rearrangement of the EWSR1 gene confirmed the diagnosis. Seven other cases have been described to date, one of them with similar histological features. Conclusion: PSEFK can occur in younger patients. The presence of entrapped hyperplastic renal tubules may be reminiscent of biphasic 
