efee5f84bb306dad8638d17f975f96699279b778
Lancet Global Health Commission on Global Eye Health: Vision Beyond 2020 -Supplementary Appendix 1



VISION 2020 was set up to eliminate avoidable blindness by 2020. It was formed from a partnership between WHO and a Task Force of the IAPB and launched in 1999. The rationale was that the number of people blind in the world was increasing due to population growth, ageing and inadequate eye care services in many LMICs; yet 80% of all blindness was preventable or treatable with proven cost-effective interventions. The strategy that was developed and followed was to developing primary and secondary level eye care services at the district level of health care through human resource and infrastructure development to address the major diseases causing avoidable blindness, which at that time were: cataract, refractive error and low vision, trachoma, onchocerciasis and blindness in children. • Improved coordination and focus on priorities to improve eye care and reduce blindness. • Advocacy for improved eye care at global and national level with policy makers, health planners and eye care professionals. • Resource mobilisation for eye care from national governments, Official Development Assistance (ODA) donor governments, international Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and the corporate sector including drug donation programmes for trachoma and onchocerciasis. • Programme planning and implementation, increased training of eye care workers, improvements in infrastructure and technology for eye care, and disease control programs including elimination of trachoma and onchocerciasis. After the establishment of WHO in 1948 the first public health activity in eye health started in 1952 with a Task Force on Trachoma. Subsequently, a public health approach to infective and nutritional eye diseases, particularly trachoma, onchocerciasis and vitamin A deficiency led to global and regional programmes at the community level and the concept of community eye health. In the 1970s the International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness (IAPB) was formed and WHO established a programme to prevent blindness (PBL). Lesson 2 -the importance of common definitions, high quality data and scientific evidence on which to develop global, regional and national health programmes. Since the 1970s population-based surveys have collected data to assess the magnitude and causes of vision impairment 1,2 ; definitions were updated to reflect actual need for eye care 3, 4 ; national programmes for prevention of blindness were established and promoted in many countries, and effective interventions for the control of the common blinding diseases were described (cataract, trachoma, vitamin A deficiency, onchocerciasis). 5 All these activities led to a better understanding of the problem of blindness and vision impairment worldwide, and develop rationale solutions tailored to needs. Several major causes of blindness lent themselves to prevention, using a public health approach. Global and regional disease-specific control programmes were initiated, based on the evidence and facilitated by public-private health partnerships (e.g. drug donation programmes) and international development financing. These include the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control and WHO Alliance for the Global Elimination of Trachoma by 2020 (GET2020). Corneal blindness in young children is addressed through vitamin A supplementation and measles vaccine delivered as part of child health programmes. There are many "not for profit" (non-government) eye care organisations and providers. Initially a coalition of these organisations (later under the umbrella organisation IAPB working with WHO) developed and launched in 1999 a Global Initiative called "VISION 2020: The Right to Sight" with the goal of eliminating avoidable blindness by 2020. 5, 6 This global initiative has had success in advocacy for eye health, some resource mobilisation, and in creating a common focus among a variety of stakeholders for eye care programme activities. The VISION 2020 planning approach has been used in many countries, alongside a range of other reforms, to deliver significant improvements in eye health services. Yet, avoidable blindness has not been eliminated. At the same time the strong involvement of the not-for-profit sector resulted in some low-income countries considering that eye care was being addressed by these external agencies and therefore the government could use its limited resources on other priorities. Consequently, there was a lack of ownership by some countries for the planning and financing of eye care services. In the last decade in order to address Universal Eye Health there has been greater engagement with health ministries. In 2013 the World Health Assembly (WHA) adopted Resolution 66.4 "A Global Action Plan 2014-19 (GAP) for Universal Eye Health", whose vision was a "a world in which no one is needlessly visually impaired, where those with unavoidable vision loss can achieve their full potential and where there is universal access to comprehensive eye care services". 7 The GAP aimed to reduce avoidable visual impairment by 25% in 2019 compared to 2010 estimates. The 2014-19 GAP had three major objectives: (1) generate evidence on the magnitude and causes of VI and use it in advocacy; (2) develop and implement integrated national eye health policies and plans; and (3) ensure multi-sectoral engagement and effective partnerships.  Over recent decades there have been several developments in WHO recommendations on how vision impairment is measured, defined and categorised, particularly for use in population-based epidemiological surveys of vision impairment. The number of sub-categories has increased, there is greater emphasis on standardisation, and changes in the type of VA measured (e.g. corrected and uncorrected acuity). In 1972, WHO convened a Technical Study Group on The Prevention of Blindness in response to a request for standard definitions of blindness and visual impairment from the WHA. 3 The resulting classification system was based on "bestcorrected visual acuity" (BCVA). This measure required vision impairment surveys to record the maximum vision achieved by refracting participants. This classification was included in the 9 th and 10 th revisions of International Classification of Diseases (ICD-9 and ICD-10). However, using BCVA obscured that, in many settings, people may not own spectacles, and so live with vision impairment from URE. In 2003, WHO convened a consultation to revise these definitions. 4 The group recommended using "presenting vision" instead of BCVA, with epidemiological surveys reporting VA only with spectacles owned by participants, capturing new information on URE. This change, along with additional vision impairment categories, were introduced in a 2010 revision to ICD-10. In ICD-11 definitions of distance vision impairment were further updated with an additional subdivision of not impaired and mild vision impairment (Commission Report Table 1 ). 8 WHO has also signalled in the World Report on Vision an intention to change the way vision impairment is primarily reported, moving away from reporting only presenting VA, to also reporting uncorrected VA (without spectacle or contact lenses if worn). 9 Including the measurement of uncorrected acuity allows for better estimation of ongoing service need and the effective coverage of refractive error correction. In addition, ICD-11 recommends measurement of VA for each eye separately and for both eyes together in epidemiological studies, as there is increasing emphasis on the impact on visual function of unilateral (monocular) vision impairment. 10 In prevalence surveys the level of vision impairment is based on VA in the better seeing eye. The Commission uses VA categories defined in Snellen in metres when presenting and discussing data. Moderate and severe vision impairment (MSVI) is defined as VA worse than 6/18 but equal to or better than 3/60. In addition to defining blindness by VA, blindness is also defined based on constriction of the visual field to within 10° of central fixation from any cause; and cortical blindness, when the person is unable to make sense of visual information due to disease involving the posterior visual pathways and/or the visual cortex. Near vision impairment is present when the near visual acuity is worse than N6, which corresponds approximately to a distance visual acuity of <6/12. Lens opacities obstruct or scatter light entering the eye. Cataract is the leading cause of blindness globally (17.8 million) and the second leading cause of moderate or severe vision impairment (83.2 million) . Most cataracts are the result of age-related changes, but cataract is also linked to UV damage, smoking, dehydration crisis, metabolic disturbance such as diabetes, galactosemia, and steroid use. Blindness and vision impairment due to cataract are more common among women than men. Young children may also be affected. Cataract surgery with intraocular lens (IOL) implantation, usually under local anaesthesia, is a very effective treatment. There are several different types of procedure. Most patients (70%-90%) attain a bestcorrected visual acuity of 6/18 or better by 2 months. Cataract surgery is a highly cost-effective intervention. 11 Cataract surgery for young children is more complex and requires expertise and a general anaesthetic Blurred vision because light is not sharply focused on the retina, due to a mismatch between the axial length of the eye and the refractive power of the cornea and/or lens. Hypermetropia (long sight) is difficulty seeing near objects. Astigmatism arises from irregular corneal curvature and affects vision at all distances. Myopia (short sight) is difficulty seeing distant objects. High myopia can be accompanied by degenerative changes in the retina (atrophy, holes, detachment) and sclera (posterior staphyloma). 12 Uncorrected refractive error is the second leading cause of blindness globally (3.7 million) and the first leading cause of moderate or severe vision impairment (157.5 million) . Myopia is the most common form, usually developing in childhood and adolescence. Globally there is an ongoing major increase in the prevalence of myopia and high myopia. This is most marked in the Asia-Pacific region. 13 In Asian children this may be attributable to intense schooling practices. Refractive error can be corrected using spectacles, contact lenses, IOL implantation during cataract surgery or laser refractive surgery. Spectacles can be provided for as little as US$ 5 per pair. 14 Interventions proven to reduce incidence and/or progression of myopia include low-dose atropine, certain designs of spectacles and contact lenses reducing peripheral optical defocus, orthokeratology and increasing time outdoors. 15, 16  Loss of accommodation (the ability to change focus from far to near) as a natural part of ageing results in a reduced unaided ability to see near objects, as in reading, using mobile phones, threading needles or recognising money. The condition begins at around age 40 and becomes essentially universal by the late 50s. 17 Thus, the prevalence peaks during the most productive working years when it is shown to hamper economic productivity. 18 Detection and treatment are challenging, although artificial intelligence has tremendous potential to improve diagnosis. It is uncertain whether populationbased screening of glaucoma is cost-effective. In high income countries it is not, but, in India and China it may be. 20, 21 Treatment aims to reduce the intraocular pressure through: topical medication, laser (trabeculoplasty, iridotomy),or surgery (trabeculectomy, aqueous drainage shunts). Degeneration of the central part of the retina (macula) which is responsible for clear central vision. AMD has "dry" and "wet" forms. The latter is more likely to damage vision due to abnormal, blood vessels that AMD is the fourth leading cause of blindness globally (1.9 million) and the third leading cause of moderate or severe vision impairment (6.2 million). AMD is the leading cause of vision loss in high-income countries. It Wet AMD can be effectively controlled by repeated, long term anti-VEGF intravitreal injections, which have the potential to stabilise vision. 22 Extensive research is being undertaken to develop additional therapies. 23, 24 develop under the retina, which can leak fluid and bleed. However, atrophy of the macula in dry AMD may also cause significant vision loss. has a complex polygenetic basis which is influenced by other factors (smoking, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia). Dry AMD is more common than wet AMD. Most vision loss occurs in those above the age of 70 years. Oral anti-oxidant vitamins, and smoking cessation may reduce the risk of AMD progression. Damage to the small blood vessels in the retina leads to leakage of plasma fluid and blood, which may damage central vision ("diabetic macular oedema, DMO"). Retinal ischemia from blocked vessels can lead to abnormal, fragile new vessel growth on the retina ("proliferative diabetic retinopathy PDR"). These can bleed and the traction this creates may detach the retina. DMO is a more frequent cause of vision loss than PDR. Diabetic retinal disease (DMO and PDR; DR) is the fifth leading cause of blindness globally (1.1 million) and the fifth leading cause of moderate or severe vision impairment (3.8 million). It is the only leading condition that is currently experiencing an increase in agestandardised prevalence. About one third of people with diabetes mellitus have DR, which is the leading cause of blindness globally among people of working age. Blindness and vision impairment due to DR are more common among women than among men. The risk of DR among people with diabetes increases the longer they have had diabetes, and by poor diabetes control, hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia. Marked increases in DR are being reported as the prevalence of diabetes rises in all world regions. General medical care with self-management should seek to optimise control of blood sugar, blood pressure and cholesterol. Treatment of DR depends on the type and severity, options include: retinal laser; intravitreal injection of anti-VEGF or steroid; retinal surgery. Timely treatment has been proven to reduce the risk of vision loss. 25 Thus, DR screening programmes (using retinal photography) are becoming more widely adopted globally, and are proven to significantly reduce blindness by promoting early treatment. 26 Caused by repeated infection of the ocular surface with the bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis. 27 Chronic conjunctival inflammation (active trachoma), characterised by lymphoid follicles results in conjunctival scarring and inward-turning of the eyelids (entropion) and eyelashes (trichiasis). Vision loss results from corneal scarring. In May 2020, trachoma was known to be a public health problem in 45 countries, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. Around 1.9 million people were estimated to be blind/vision impaired from trachoma and 137 million lived in areas requiring programmes to control active trachoma. 28 The transmission of Chlamydia trachomatis is thought to be through direct person-to-person contact, on fomites or by eye-seeking flies. 27 Trachoma flourishes in environments with limited access to water and sanitation, and clusters in poorer communities. Children are the major reservoir of infection (though they themselves are not usually visually-affected), and those who care for them (usually women) are at greatest risk for visually-significant disease. Trachoma elimination programmes use the SAFE strategy. 27 Eyelid surgery ("S") can correct entropion and trichiasis. Mass antibiotic treatment ("A"), usually with oral azithromycin, is given to whole districts once a year. Facial cleanliness ("F") and environmental improvement ("E"), particularly increased access to water and sanitation, are promoted to suppress transmission. As of June 2020, nine countries had been validated as having eliminated trachoma as a public health problem using this strategy and more were poised to do so soon. Activities leading to trachoma elimination are coordinated internationally within the WHO Alliance for the Global Elimination of Trachoma by 2020 (GET2020). Onchocerciasis, known as "river blindness," is caused by infection with Onchocerca volvulus, transmitted by the blackfly Simulium damnosum. The microfilaria cause an inflammatory reaction in the eye leading to damage to several structures (corneal scars, uveitis, chorioretinal atrophy, optic neuritis and optic atrophy). Skin manifestations are common and can be disfiguring and cause pronounced and prolonged itching. Onchocerciasis is endemic in 34 countries, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. Around 21 million people are infected individuals globally and more than 1 million people with vision impairment. 29 The blackfly vector lives and breeds near fast flowing water, and so communities living in these fertile areas are at greatest risk of infection. In hyper-endemic zones, a substantial proportion of adults may be visually impaired. Disease control involves community-directed mass drug administration of ivermectin. Ivermectin kills microfilariae, and stops adult worms from producing more microfilaria for a few months following treatment. Control of blackfly has been achieved in some countries by spraying rivers with larvicides in coordinated, multi-national programmes. By October Lancet Global Health Commission on Global Eye Health: Vision Beyond 2020 -Supplementary Appendix 1 13 2018 four countries in Latin America had been verified as having eliminated onchocerciasis. The cornea can be infected by bacteria, fungi, viruses (such as herpes simplex virus) and protozoa (such as acanthamoeba). Corneal ulcers are characterised by pain, reduced vision, and signs of acute inflammation. On resolution, the cornea may be left with visually disabling or cosmetically-significant scarring. Delayed or inadequate treatment may lead to the loss of the infected eye. Major risk factors for bacterial and fungal infections are contact lens use, minor abrasions to the cornea surface and pre-existing ocular surface disease. The use of traditional eye medicine may also exacerbate the problem. Bacterial infections predominate in temperate regions and fungal infections are more common in tropical regions. The annual global incidence of fungal keratitis exceeds 1 million. 30 Acanthamoeba is acquired through exposure to contaminated water or contact lens solutions. Agricultural workers and those living in rural areas are at particular risk of trauma may have poor access to care. The risk of corneal infection is reduced by careful contact lens hygiene and the use of protective eyewear in the workplace. Early diagnosis and application of prophylactic antibiotics to corneal abrasions reduces risk of progression to microbial keratitis. 31 Treatment of established infections requires urgent, intense topical therapy (lasting days to many weeks) with an appropriate antimicrobial, ideally informed by microbiological results. Injury to the eye and adjacent structures can occur due to penetrating injury, mechanical force, or exposure to chemicals, heat, or radiation. Peak ages: 4-7 years, mid-20s and among older people. Males more than females. Most children are injured during play; most adult injuries are related to work, sport, violence or motor vehicle collisions. Blindness is often monocular. Prevention: protective eye wear, seat belts. Treatment of more severe eye injuries is complex and may require surgery with varying visual outcomes. Visual rehabilitation often requires long term treatment, which should include protective lenses to reduce risk of damage to the healthy eye. Conditions include degenerative ectasia (keratoconus), dystrophies and inflammatory conditions. Keratoconus is the most frequent; the cornea bulges outwards, becoming very thin. Keratoconus usually becomes apparent around puberty with progressive myopia and irregular astigmatism. Prevalence varies globally, being most common in the middle east. It may be associated with allergic eye disease and other systemic conditions. Progressive keratoconus can be effectively halted by corneal collagen cross-linking. Vision can be improved by correction of refractive error, usually with contact lenses. Corneal transplantation is sometimes needed. Vitamin A maintains ocular surface integrity. Acute VAD in young children can lead to corneal melting ("keratomalacia") which is associated with high child mortality. Corneal melting and corneal ulcers usually heal to leave scarring and loss of vision. Measles infection can exacerbate or cause VAD. Young children (<5 years) and pregnant women living in poor communities are at greatest risk of VAD. 32 In 2005 there were an estimated 5 million young children and 10 million pregnant women affected by VAD. The incidence of corneal scarring and death from VAD is declining globally as a result of control measures. VAD can be prevented through diets rich in yellow and orange fruits and vegetables, dark green leafy vegetables, eggs and milk. Regular vitamin A supplementation of preschool age children and measles vaccination have reduced corneal blindness in most affected countries. Children with measles and the ocular signs of VAD should be given three doses of high dose vitamin A. This disease of premature new-borns is caused by a failure of normal retinal vascular development. Subsequent retinal neovascularisation, and detachment can develop, leading to total, irreversible blindness during infancy. ROP is among the leading causes of blindness in children globally. 33 Risk factors for ROP include prematurity, low birth weight, poorly-controlled oxygen therapy and sepsis. Blindness from ROP is increasing in regions where neonatal services are being expanded. For 2010 it was estimated 184,000 babies developed ROP of which 32,200 became blind or severely visually impaired. 34 Risk is reduced by good ante-natal care, maternal steroids in threatened preterm labour, and meticulous neonatal care with tight control of oxygen therapy from immediately after birth. 35 Preterm babies are regularly screened for signs of ROP, which requires significant technical capacity. Treatment options include retinal laser, anti-VEGF intravitreal injections and surgery for retinal detachment. Amblyopia is a vision development disorder in which the visual pathways fail to fully mature due to impaired visual input in early childhood. It may affect one or, less commonly, both eyes. Amblyopia can arise for many reasons, including strabismus (squint), RE and ocular media opacities (cataract). It currently affects around 100 million people globally. 36 Early detection and treatment of the primary cause is important where possible, for example cataract surgery. Assess and address refractive error. Amblyopia treatment with patching may be needed. CVI arises from damage to the visual pathways within the brain. The eyes and anterior visual pathways appear relatively normal, but pallor of the optic discs usually develop. Affected children may present with visual inattentiveness and they may have other neurological problems such as cerebral palsy. CVI is the most frequent cause of childhood visual impairment in high income countries. It has many causes including conditions which interfere with the blood supply to the brain, infections, hydrocephalus, trauma, intracranial haemorrhage and prematurity. In low income countries it can be a complication of cerebral malaria and meningitis. In adults, CVI with or without a visual field defect can be the first presentation of a stroke, brain tumour, dementia or other degenerative brain condition. Early recognition of CVI in someone who may have only mild or moderate impairment of distance visual acuity initially, but profound impairment of visual functioning (eg inability to find their way around safely, or to interpret written information or signs) is important, to enable timely onward referral to a neurologist for diagnosis and appropriate management and support. Comprehensive rehabilitation services should be offered that are matched to the child's needs. Uveitis is a broad grouping of intraocular inflammatory and infectious conditions resulting from inflammation of the uveal tract inside the eye. Scleritis is inflammation of the sclera, the tough white coat of the eyeball. They present with a wide spectrum of symptoms, including pain, redness, sensitivity to light, and loss of vision. In uveitis, examination may reveal inflammatory cells inside the eye and changes to the inner aspect of the cornea, iris, retina, choroid, blood vessels and optic nerve head. Uveitis and scleritis may be classified by cause and location (anterior, intermediate, posterior  The manuscript for this review is forthcoming. A methods summary is provided below; the review protocol has been published. 38 The principle findings are outlined in the Commission Report Table 2 and Figure 4 . Title: Global Eye Health and the Sustainable Development Goals: Protocol for a Scoping Review Objective: We aimed to answer the following two questions: A methods summary is provided below; the review protocol has been published. 41 The principal findings are outlined in the Commission Report Ophthalmic intervention: Any intervention that aims to correct or improve vision, slow down the progression of vision loss, improve functional ability among those with vision loss (e.g., low vision rehabilitation, use of assistive devices), or relieve eye pain or discomfort. Quality of life: Generic or health-related, vision-related, or disease-specific quality of life. Systematic review: A review that includes a research question, a search strategy with the sources searched, inclusion and exclusion criteria, screening methods, a discussion about the quality of included studies and risk of bias, and information about data analysis and synthesis. Key inclusion/ exclusion criteria: Included: Systematic reviews and meta-analyses that evaluate the impact of vision impairment, eye disease, or ophthalmic interventions on quality of life; Systematic reviews that reported on quality of life outcomes such as health-related, vision-related, or disease-specific quality of life questionnaires, or qualitative assessment of physical, emotional and social well-being, vision function in day-to-day life. Excluded: Systematic reviews that assessed stroke-related visual impairment and eye diseases or psychologic interventions, such as coping strategies; Systematic reviews that included case series or expert opinion pieces; Systematic reviews in a language other than English. Number of included studies: 69 Protocol registration: Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/qhv9g/); 10 February 2020; made "public" on 5 June 2020. Interventions included: cataract surgery, correction of refractive error, antibiotic use after corneal surgery, anti-VEGF treatment for AMD or DR, trabeculectomy surgery for glaucoma, rehabilitation for untreatable cases of vision impairment, trichiasis surgery in trachoma, uveitis treatment and vision screening. The outer ring represents the overall number of interventional studies identified by eye condition category. In the inner ring, the darker shade represents improvement in quality of life in the group receiving an intervention, compared to baseline or a control group (no intervention, placebo/sham therapy). The inner ring lighter shade represents the lack of an association or no difference in quality of life after an intervention compared to baseline or a control group. Each intervention may be informed by more than one systematic review, and each systematic review may have assessed more than one intervention. This review was summarised from the following report: Keay The executive summary of the report is provided below. This rapid review was convened to investigate the intersection of eye health and common non-communicable diseases (NCDs). A series of pragmatic, rapid reviews were conducted to appraise the available evidence and answer the following key questions: This review identified that people with eye health conditions often also have major NCDs: • Population based data from High Income Countries (HIC) and Middle-Income Countries (MIC) countries find 27% prevalence of cancer, 14% prevalence of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), 39% prevalence of 'heart disease', 25% prevalence of depression in adults with eye diseases and 7% presence of dementia in adults with glaucoma. • Studies which compare prevalence in adults find that people with eye conditions were more likely than those without (controlled studies) to also report a current or previous diagnosis of the chronic conditions cancer: any cancer (OR 1.2, 95% CI 1.1-1.4), lung cancer (OR 2.1 95% CI 1.1-3.9), cardiovascular disease (OR 1.6, 95% CI 1.4-1.9), depression (OR1.6, 95% CI 1.4-1.8), and dementia (OR 2.0, 95% CI 1.7-2.4). • Cataract is more common in sun-related skin pathologies (basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and actinic keratosis) possibly due to the common risk factor of sun exposure. Cataract is more prevalent with CVD. • There is evidence that the comorbid prevalence of NCDs is related to the severity of vision loss. Retinopathy is more prevalent with increasing severity coronary artery disease (CAD). Similarly, depression is more prevalent with more severe vision loss. • When there are multiple comorbidities, the impact on NCDs like dementia or depression is increased. For example, individuals with dual sensory loss (combined vision and hearing loss) are also have a diagnosis of dementia. Similarly, depression is even more prevalent in those with cancer and vision loss than those with cancer alone. • More research is needed in Low and Middle-Income Countries (LMIC) to determine the patterns of comorbidities with eye diseases in these settings. • CVD has the most similar profile of risk factors reflecting the fact that many eye diseases involve the retinal microvasculature. Common risk factors include lifestyle factors like tobacco smoking, excessive alcohol consumption and obesity are implicated in both eye diseases and CVD. Consumption of vegetables and fruits, Mediterranean diet and physical activity are protective for eye health conditions and CVD. • Other NCDs like cancer have less similar profile and the strongest common risk factor is older age for both eye conditions and cancer where 70% of incident cases and 87% of deaths are in people over 50 years of age. • The lifestyle risk factors above are also common to some cancers. Smoking is a risk factor which is common between COPD and eye conditions though it has a very strong association with COPD (4x increased risk). • There are some similarities in risk factors between dementia and eye conditions: systemic diseases like diabetes (risk factor for glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy), health indicators like high blood pressure and (limited evidence for risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and diabetic retinopathy) high cholesterol and lifestyle factors including smoking and a protective effect for the Mediterranean diet. However, there were mixed or conflicting support for physical activity as a protective factor for dementia. • There were some common risk factors for depression and eye conditions, including hypertension, diabetes, obesity and common protective effects including physical activity and diet specifically fish, fruit and vegetables, micronutrients like Vitamin D. • It is also likely that vision impairment is on the causal pathway for depression as shown by the 1.6x increased risk of depression in adults with vision impairment. • More research is needed in LMIC • Longitudinal studies are needed to establish causality rather than simple associations. • Social determinants are not always investigated with far stronger focus on biological and environment risk factors This panel drew on the results of a systematic review which is forthcoming, the abstract is below. Niranjani Nagarajan, Lama Assi, Varshini Varadaraj, Mina Motaghi, Yi Sun, Elizabeth Couser, Joshua R. Ehrlich, Heather Whitson, Bonnielin K Swenor Question: Is visual impairment associated with cognitive decline, cognitive impairment, and dementia? Findings: In this systematic review of 110 strong to moderate quality studies, we found that 91 studies (83%) indicated a significant association between VI and cognitive decline, impairment, and dementia. Meaning: Existing scientific literature provides consistent evidence for an association of visual impairment with cognitive impairment, cognitive decline, and dementia. There has been increasing epidemiological research examining the association between visual impairment (VI) and cognitive impairment. Both conditions increase with age and cause substantial morbidity. Poor vision may be a modifiable risk factor for cognitive decline, which makes it critical to clarify the association between these conditions. The objective of this systematic review is to synthesize the published literature on the association of VI with cognitive decline, cognitive impairment, and dementia, which may inform future research, including efforts to develop interventions, and guide policies that address these important public health issues. A literature search was performed in Embase, Medline, and Cochrane library databases and was limited to peerreviewed journals published in English from inception to March 2020. The review included publications that contained subjective and/or objective measures of vision and cognition, or a diagnosis of visual impairment, cognitive impairment or dementia. Longitudinal or cross-sectional studies with ≥ 100 participants aged >50 years were included. The literature search identified 11,805 relevant articles whose abstracts underwent independent screening by two teams of study authors. Data abstraction was performed by one author. Three reviewers independently assessed study quality using the Effective Public Health Practice Project Quality Assessment Tool (EPHPP) After abstract screening, 110 full-text articles were selected for data extraction, of which 53 were cross-sectional, 43 longitudinal, and 14 were case-control studies. The number of participants included in these studies ranged from 112 to 7,210,535. Ninety-one (83%) of these studies reported that VI was associated with cognitive impairment 17 studies received a strong overall quality assessment rating, 12 of which found a positive association between VI and cognitive impairment; 70 studies received an overall moderate rating, 58 of which found a positive association. The remaining 23 studies received a weak rating. Our systematic review indicates that a majority of studies examining the vision-cognition relationship report that VI is associated with cognitive decline, cognitive impairment, and dementia among older adults. This synthesis of evidence supports the need for additional research to understand the mechanisms underlying the association between VI and cognitive impairment and to test interventions that mitigate the cognitive consequences of vision loss. The manuscript for this review is forthcoming: Prevalence and impact of combined vision and hearing (dual sensory) impairment: a scoping review Bright T, Ramke J, Zhang JH, Kitema GF, Mdala S, Safi S, Yoshizaki M, Mactaggart I, Gordon I, Swenor B, Burton MJ, Evans JR. Prevalence and impact of combined vision and hearing (dual sensory) impairment: a scoping review Objective: We aimed to answer the following three questions:  Vision and hearing impairment (dual sensory impairment (DSI)) are prevalent worldwide. Both become increasingly common with age and often occur concurrently. 42 DSI is an important consideration for healthy ageing as global populations grow older. We identified 137 primary studies, which were mostly population-based and located in HICs (90%). There was striking heterogeneity (67 alternatives) in DSI definitions. A wide range of clinical test methods, thresholds, and self-reported impairment scales were used for both impairments. DSI prevalence was reported for at least 13 different age groups. This makes meta-analyses very difficult and results in a wide prevalence range. For example, in three population-based studies in HICs among people 65 years and older that used clinical assessment tools and similar DSI criteria (vision impairment threshold of <6/18 in better-seeing eye; hearing impairment threshold of >25dB pure tone average in better-hearing ear), prevalence ranged from 3.1% to 24%. [43] [44] [45] Many studies reported DSI impacts people's physical and psychological health and their ability to engage socially and live independent lives. More than half of studies reported consistently worse outcomes for all domains considered, and a further quarter reported a majority of outcomes being worse among the domains considered. Only a few studies (6%) reported no differences in the lived experience of people with DSI. DSI is relatively common, particularly in older people, and has a major impact on the lives of affected people and is worthy of much more attention. A consensus position on definitions and reporting age groups is needed to enable facilitate estimates to shape services that meet the needs of people with DSI. A manuscript for this review is forthcoming. A summary of methods is provided below. Objective: The objectives of this systematic review were to: 1. Describe the associations between vision impairment and risk of motor vehicle collision involvement across the lifespan 2. Evaluate vision-related interventions to reduce motor vehicle collision risk. 59 In Japan, a cross-sectional study found the highest crash rate in drivers with severe glaucoma, with 25% involved in MVCs compared to 3.5% for drivers without glaucoma. 60 Several studies of drivers with glaucoma found at least two times increased risk for MVCs with severe visual field loss. 59, 61, 62 However, other clinic-based studies of glaucoma patients do not report evidence for increased MVCs, attributing this to selfregulatory driving practices. 63, 64 Pooled analyses from four AMD studies did not demonstrate an association between AMD and increased MVC involvement. 65 There is evidence that drivers with AMD who continue to drive, adapt and restrict their driving. 66 Drivers with neovascular AMD who were treated with anti-VEGF therapy (ranibizumab) reported better driving ability than sham treatment. 67 Treatment with ranibizumab for diabetic macular oedema is also associated with increased driving participation and proportionally more patients meeting vision requirements for driving. 68 Although MVC involvement is a major concern, driving is also a means to independent mobility and access to education and employment. Young people with amblyopia or unilateral vision impairment are less likely to acquire a drivers' licence. 69 For older drivers, maintenance of good vision is critically important, e.g. through timely access to cataract surgery. A review of drivers on cataract surgery waiting lists in Australia found 31% did not meet vision requirements for driving and 53% believed their cataract had impacted their driving. 70 With the increasing reliance and preference for motor vehicle transport, maintenance of vision for drivers is essential to prevent road traffic injuries and promote independent mobility. A manuscript for this review is forthcoming. A summary of methods is provided below. Objective: We aimed to answer the following questions: 1. To investigate whether visual impairment should be considered as an independent risk factor for falls in people aged over 65 years. To examine if visual interventions like expedited cataract surgery, refractive correction or reduced glare, help to reduce the risk of falls in people aged over 65 years. Search date: 5 January 2020 Search databases: Medline, Medline Epub ahead of print and in process & other non-indexed, Embase, CINAHL, ProQuest Science and Technology, Web of Science, Scopus Key definitions: Fall: A fall is defined as an event that results in a person coming to rest inadvertently on the ground or floor or other lower level (WHO). Vision impairment: The International Classification of Diseases 11 (2018) classifies vision impairment into two groups, distance and near presenting vision impairment. Distance vision impairment; mild -presenting visual acuity worse than 6/12, moderate -presenting visual acuity worse than 6/18, severe -presenting visual acuity worse than 6/60, blindness -presenting visual acuity worse than 3/60. Near vision impairment; presenting near visual acuity worse than n6 or m.08 with existing correction (WHO Globally, one third of people over aged 65 years fall each year and, for adults over 70 years, falls are the leading cause of injury-related death. 29, 71 Population ageing and greater mortality risk per fall make this an emerging problem in LMIC and risk mitigation is important. 72 Falls have multiple causes, including environmental, biological, socio-economic and behavioural factors; however, vision impairment is an independent risk factor. 71 Vision impairment increased risk of falls (OR 1.52, 95% CI 1.29-1.78) and recurrent falls (OR, 1.81, 95% CI 1.58-2.08). 73 Several large longitudinal studies have found increased risk of falls among people with vision impairment (OR 1.46, 95% CI 1.04-2.04), 74 visual field loss (OR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.10 per 10 points of visual field loss), 75 and peripheral (OR 1.42, 95% CI 1.06-1.91) and central visual field loss (OR 2.4, 95% CI 1.02-5.45). 76 Specific eye diseases (glaucoma, AMD and cataract) have been shown to increase risk of falls. [77] [78] [79] There is consistent evidence that timely access to cataract surgery can reduce falls risk. In one RCT in the UK, for example, people allocated to expedited first eye surgery (4 weeks) had reduced risk of falls (rate ratio (RR) 0. 66 Falls risk can also be increased by changes in spectacle correction. 83, 84 A prospective cohort of adults with cataract found changes in spectacle correction after cataract surgery increased falls risk (IRR 2.17 [95%CI 1.23-3.85]). 83 These findings are consistent with laboratory studies which find changes to spectacle magnification impacts stair negotiation and balance control. 85 Although falls are multifactorial in aetiology, vision impairment is an independent risk factor. Falls risk assessment tools need to include vision to help identify older people at risk. 86 There is also need for better integration with eye care services as part of falls prevention efforts in view of the strong evidence for maintaining good vision to prevent falls in older age. A methods summary is provided below; the review protocol has been published. 87 The principal findings are outlined in the Commission Report. The manuscript for this review is forthcoming:  Objective: We aimed to answer the following questions: 1. What is the extent, strength, and quality of the published evidence that vision impairment is associated with the risk of all-cause mortality? 2. To what degree does vision impairment affect the risk of all-cause mortality? 3. What are potential causes of variation in the association of vision impairment with mortality (e.g. measurement, study bias, follow-up duration, etc.)?  Data source: GBD/VLEG 2020 data. 88  Data source GBD/VLEG 2020 data. 88  In the absence of precise estimates of the prevalence of blindness in children from population-based surveys, under 5 mortality rates have been used as a proxy indicator. There is also some evidence of an association between under 5 mortality rates and the prevalence of blindness in children, using the available data. 89 The rationale for this is that under 5 mortality rates indicate whether populations of children are at risk of vitamin A deficiency, which is associated with higher mortality and blindness. 90 The under 5 mortality rate for the year half way through the 16 years of childhood (0-15 years) is used, as this best represents the prevailing socio-economic, public health and health system factors. For example, for the 2020 estimate, under 5 mortality rates for 2013 were used. 91 The Global Burden of Diseases population projections for the year 2020 were used, which present data for each country by age group and sex (http://ghdx.healthdata.org/countries). A spreadsheet of the child population aged 0-15 years (to be consistent with previous estimates) was prepared for every country by GBD region. 2013 under 5 mortality rates for each country were extracted and added, and the prevalence was estimated, using the scale outlined in Supplementary Data from several recent studies of blindness in children, in Fiji, Bangladesh and Vietnam have population estimates which are very similar to those derived using under 5 mortality rates as a proxy. 92-94 The regional numbers were derived from the country level estimates and shown in Supplementary Table 7 and represented in Supplementary Figure 4 . The major diseases causing blindness in children vary widely, being largely determined by socio-economic factors, and are represented schematically in Supplementary Figure 5 . Globally approximately 40% of children are blind from conditions which could have been prevented or managed, with a higher proportion being avoidable in LICs. In HICs the main causes of blindness are central nervous system lesions often as a consequence of preterm birth. 95 Potentially avoidable causes include cataract, glaucoma and ROP. In MICs, initiatives to reduce neonatal mortality through improving access to intensive neonatal care, are increasing the survival of preterm infants. This has led to a dramatic increase in blindness from ROP. 96 In LICs patterns of blindness have changed over the last 30 years as global strategies to control measles infection and vitamin A deficiency have reduced corneal blindness. In these countries cataract has become the most common avoidable cause, and ROP is emerging in the larger cities. In all regions unavoidable causes include genetic retinal conditions and congenital eye anomalies. These children require early vision rehabilitation.  Regional estimates of the total number of blind children were derived using under 5 mortality rates as a proxy for prevalence, methodology is described in the supplementary annex. The number at the top of each bar is the regional prevalence in number per 10,000 children. The data plotted in Commission Report Figure 10 are outlined below. 2000  1406  932  1932  163  86  387  2010  1950  1422  2543  277  153  589  2020  2620  1976  3366  399  233  815  2030  3361  2578  4217  517  298  1082  2040  4089  3145  5128  696  381  1518  2050  4758  3620  6056  938  Representative population-based surveys provide accurate estimates of disease prevalence, service coverage and outcomes. 100 In ophthalmic epidemiology, stakeholders are interested in the prevalence and magnitude of eye diseases, vision impairment and blindness. In some cases this may involve a focus on marginalised sub-groups, associated risk factors, individual and societal impacts, and access to eye care services. 101 These data are needed to support effective planning, resourcing, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of services, and can be aggregated to provide regional or global estimates for advocacy and comparison purposes. 88, [102] [103] [104] There are several survey methodologies used to obtain a population-representative random sample. 105,106 These include taking a simple or systematic random sample of individuals or clusters of individuals, with or without stratification. An important principle is that each individual in the target population has an equal chance of being selected to take part in the study. This can be achieved by techniques such as sampling without replacement and maintaining probability sampling. Survey methodology depends on the goals and the sample size needed. Broadly, there are two approaches to eye health surveys, comprehensive and rapid. Supplementary Table 13 compares the key attributes of comprehensive surveys with the most common rapid assessment method (RAAB, the Rapid Assessment of Avoidable Blindness). The most applicable approach ultimately balances epidemiological rigour and resources. Comprehensive eye health surveys typically include in-depth ophthalmic examination with imaging for independent retinal grading, and rich data on risk factors. [107] [108] [109] The need to diagnose eye disease in field testing sites, rather than in a well-equipped hospital clinic, necessitates some diagnostic compromises, which are reflected in epidemiological case definitions of disease. Good progress has been made towards standardising case definitions for some eye diseases, such as glaucoma, cataract, and posterior segment diseases visible on retinal imaging. 110 However, with variation in equipment, staff and examination protocols, case definitions continue to vary between surveys, which can present a challenge for comparability. 104, 111, 112 Greater standardisation of methodologies and reporting of comprehensive eye health surveys is imperative. 9 A number of rapid assessment methodologies are available for generating population-based estimates of common causes of vision impairment. 113 The most commonly used of these is the Rapid Assessment of Avoidable Blindness (RAAB), originally developed as the Rapid Assessment of Cataract Surgical (RACSS) with a focus on planning and monitoring district-level cataract services in India in the 1990s. [114] [115] [116] "RAAB" is used to describe RAAB and its predecessors throughout this text. RAAB is a standardised methodology, that only includes the population 50 years and older, in which the prevalence of blindness is relatively high, and therefore the required sample size (and associated costs) can be lower compared to an all-age survey. It also uses relatively simple examination techniques, again limiting resource need, however this also limits the ability to diagnose some conditions. 117 Similar, but less widely used, rapid assessments include the Rapid Assessment of Refractive Error (RARE, population of interest 15-50 years) and the Rapid Assessment of Visual Impairment (RAVI, population of interest 40 years and older). 118,119 A recent study in rural China compared the findings of a RAAB to a comprehensive survey, conducted on the same group of people, by separate teams. 120 RAAB had >90% sensitivity and specificity for detecting blindness, vision impairment and impairment due to cataract. The following methods were used to generate the maps of survey coverage. Admin Level 0 (Country) and Admin Level 1 (highest within-country administrative region) world base maps were sourced from Natural Earth (www.naturalearth.com), a free resource compiled by global cartographers. Data on RAABs since 2000 were sourced from the RAAB Repository (http://raabdata.info/). RAAB meta data stored in the repository back-end as a CSV were imported into R. National level RAABs were joined directly to the Admin Level 0 base map, whilst sub-national RAABs were first joined to a dataset of ISO_3166_2 Subdivision Admin 1 codes, a free resource available from www.ip2location.com, and then the Admin Level 1 map. The VLEG 2020 source list was converted from Word to Excel, and then imported into R. 88 Pre 2000 sources, and sources marked "Rapid" were deleted from the list so that only comprehensive studies remained. In its current format, the VLEG source list denotes national versus sub-national comprehensive surveys, but does not detail which sub-national area the latter covers. Therefore, both national and sub-national comprehensive surveys have been joined to the Admin Level 0 world base map for presentation. In each case, the most recent survey per country is depicted on the map. Where national and sub-national level data exist simultaneously, sub-national data that are more recent than national data are layered above national data. Antarctica is not displayed on any of the maps. Developing reliable estimates of the prevalence and pattern of eye disease depends on good quality population-based data from surveys. Where there are no or limited data for a region, modelling approaches are sometimes used to fill in gaps. The Global Vision Database contains data from >300 surveys (comprehensive and rapid) conducted since 1980. Overall, there have been more than 330 RAABs across 81 countries to date, many of which contribute to the GBD estimates. 121 Certain regions have fewer survey data available than others. Most notably, since 2000 scant data are available for the majority of HICs across North America and Central Europe. In addition, there are comparably fewer, or older, data available for Western, Central, and some of Southern Sub-Saharan Africa, and Eastern Europe. The reasons why some countries have undertaken multiple surveys to support service planning, while others have never collected data from their populations, requires further investigation. While RAAB is available in French, Francophone countries may need additional support to initiate surveys, and for Lusophone countries, RAAB is yet to be translated. The data indicate a near ten-fold difference in the quantity of RAABs versus comprehensive surveys at both national and sub-national level over the last two decades. RAABs are not a substitute for comprehensive surveys, and the advancement of mobile technology, artificial intelligence and tele-medicine will continue to improve the affordability and feasibility of comprehensive eye health surveys over time. The availability of standardised rapid methodologies The two round Delphi was set up and distributed online. We used the 22-item STROBE checklist as the foundation of the questionnaire, to which we added additional items of specific relevance and potential importance to the reporting, design, conduct or analysis of population-based vision impairment prevalence surveys. Panel members were asked whether they considered each item to be essential or not essential for the conduct of eye health surveys, considering comprehensive and rapid survey designs independently. They were also invited to add additional items they considered important. The Round 1 summary results and commentary, plus new items added by panel members, were presented in Round 2, with invitation to review earlier responses and comment further. To identify the most important sources of bias in eye health surveys, in Round 1 we presented panel members with 14 potential sources of bias and asked them to rate the importance of each source. In Round 2 panel members ranked each source according to those which future survey investigators should prioritise investing greatest resources to minimise. The generic STROBE checklist items were endorsed as essential to high-quality reporting in both comprehensive and rapid surveys. The panel identified several STROBE items that were frequently poorly applied in the reporting of eye health surveys, and several vision specific extensions to the items. Additionally, the group highlighted a need for specific guidance to enhance the standardisation and quality of future surveys. Areas of concern included transparent reporting of random selection processes for participants, survey response rate estimation and reporting, variable quality of vision measurement, case definitions for common eye diseases and 'avoidable vision loss', and reporting crude data without appropriate adjustment to account for complex survey sampling designs. Differences between the panels' expectations for comprehensive versus rapid surveys were generally small, with most panellists recommending equivalent rigour of design, conduct, analysis and reporting in both, even though rapid surveys utilise a more swift, simple, and low-cost examination protocol. Lancet Global Health Commission on Global Eye Health: Beyond 2020 -Supplementary Appendix 1 44 Supplementary  The protocol for this review has been published, and a summary of methods is provided here.  Participants with VI from an unspecified cause or due to one of the leading causes of VI globally (i.e. cataract, uncorrected refractive error, diabetic retinopathy, glaucoma, AMD, corneal opacity and trachoma) Interventions Any report that provides information about costs of illness, burden of diseases and /or loss of well-being, estimates of the impact of VI on labour market outcomes (e.g. employment chances, labour market participation rate), informal care (e.g. number of caregiver hours) or in terms of well-being (e. Partial economic evaluation studies such as cost of illness studies, burden of illness/diseases and full economic evaluation studies such as cost-effectiveness and cost-benefit studies were included. Model-based economic evaluation studies not reporting any costs primary data or based on reviews of existing studies were excluded. All titles and abstracts were screened by two investigators independently in Covidence systematic review software. After completing the screening process, full texts were assessed by two investigators independently to establish eligibility for inclusion into the study. Any conflict in relation to screening and appraisal was discussed between the two investigators and resolved with a third investigator when necessary. A detailed description about the systematic review protocol is available in the published protocol. The PRISMA flow diagram outlines the search process and the reasons for study exclusion. APM extracted all relevant data which was then verified by one of TB, JZ or JR. The items extracted included: • Study details: study period, country/ countries of study, age range of participants, study design (e.g. cost of illness, burden of illness/diseases cost effectiveness or cost benefit studies); • Methodological details: epidemiological approach (i.e. incidence or prevalence based), perspective of analysis (e.g. societal/ government/ healthcare system/ payer/ healthcare provider or patient), method of resource quantification (e.g. top-down, bottom-up, combination), discounting methods (i.e. discount rate applied and justification); • Data and definitions: main data sources (e.g. published expenditures report, administrative database, population survey, patient clinical records, patient diaries, specially designed questionnaires, published literature), VI definition & severity (i.e. blind/ moderate or severe VI), cause of VI (and definition) if specified, disease stage if specified, currency in which costs were reported, year of cost data, cost components (e.g. direct costs, productivity costs, informal care costs), loss of well-being measures (e.g. intangible costs measured with QALYs, DALYs, years of sight loss); • Analysis of uncertainty (e.g. type of uncertainty analysed (parameter uncertainty, methodological uncertainty or modelling uncertainty), choice of parameters included in sensitivity analysis, univariate sensitivity analysis, probabilistic sensitivity analysis). All included studies were appraised by two investigators (APM, TB, JC, IJ, MJ, DM, AM) using the British Medical Journal Checklist 135 for economic submissions adapted for cost of illness studies. 136 A total of 2733 studies were identified from the search and 14 additional grey literature studies referenced by field experts. After the titles, abstracts and full text were screened, 138 studies remained. A total of 38 studies reported data for VI and/or blindness (designated as general studies). A total of 100 studies reported condition specific data (designated as condition specific studies). The conditions included: for uncorrected refractive error, cataracts, age macular degeneration, glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, corneal opacity and trachoma. The geographical distribution of general and condition specific reports are shown in Supplementary Table 15 . Several studies published more than one related report. Global data were presented in 14 reports and there are 134 distinct regional reports. Nine of the 21 GDB Regions had no reports. Five studies reported data from more than one GDB Super Region 137, 139, 187, 210, 258 , seven studies report data from more than one GDB Region. 137, 139, 187, 246, 247, 258, 273 In total, 96/134 (72%) of the regional estimates provide data from the GBD High Income Super Region. Of the 100 studies reporting disease-specific costs, several reported estimates for more than one region or condition. Overall, these 100 studies provide 105 regional condition-specific estimates as follows: 34 studies reported costs for AMD, 32 studies for cataract, 16 studies for glaucoma, 11 studies for uncorrected refractive error, 6 studies for diabetic retinopathy, 5 studies for trachoma and 1 study for corneal opacity (Supplementary Table 15 ). Many studies were not comprehensive in approach; the majority (97/138; 70%) only considered one category of cost (from direct health care costs, direct health non care costs, productivity loss, informal care, intangible costs), 25 studies (18%) considered two and only 16 (12%) considered three or more. NOTE: Several studies report data from multiple regions. We record the different regions separately, therefore, the total of region-specific reports exceeds the total number of studies in the systematic review. No. of studies Blindness was defined as presenting visual acuity <20/400 in the better-seeing eye; MSVI was defined as presenting visual acuity <20/60 to 20/400 in the better-seeing eye Blindness was defined as visual acuity less than 3/60 in the better eye; Low vision is defined as visual acuity less than <6/18 to 3/60 in the better eye. Year of cost data 2018 2010 2017 2000 Prevalence data source Crude prevalence and 95% uncertainty intervals for blindness and MSVI in people within working age, by GBD region. Data source: these data were specifically calculated by GBD Vision Loss Expert Group for 2020 for this analysis. 88 Prevalence data using WHO global VI estimates. 274, 275 Prevalence data for blindness and MSVI by country were obtained from the GBD Vision Loss Expert Group 2015 estimates. 102 It was assumed that 40% and 50% of the blind and MSVI population were of working age respectively. Prevalence data for Blindness and low vision by World Development region and age group were obtained for 1995. 276 Regions of report Global WHO ´developed` regions AMR-A, EUR-A, EUR-B1, EUR-B2, EUR-C, WPR-A1, and WPR-A2. It was assumed that only in developed countries a loss in productivity due to VI is expected to represent a real cost to an economy It is assumed that someone with is just as likely to have been employed in the absence of their VI condition. This likelihood is measured using the employment to population ratio. It was assumed that someone with VI is just as likely to be employed in the absence of their VI condition. This likelihood was expressed using employment to population ratio Labour force participation rate and unemployment rate were used to calculate probability of employment Annual Global productivity losses ranged from 26.  In this study we aimed to estimate the cost of potential lost productivity due to blindness and moderate and severe vision impairment (MSVI) across the 21 Global Burden of Diseases (GBD) regions. We combined the most recent economic, demographic and prevalence data on vision impairment and blindness to estimate the cost of potential productivity losses due to reduced employment participation among people with vision loss. Calculations were limited to the working age population (15-64 years) and were presented in 2018 US Dollar purchasing power parity (ppp). Two separate models -using Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and Gross National Income (GNI) -were calculated to enable comparability with previous estimates. 137, 139, 168, 172, 180 The annual cost of potential productivity loss was calculated for each region as the product of prevalence of blindness and MSVI, the population employment ratio, the relative reduction in employment for people with vision impairment or blindness and GDP/GNI. Data sources for each of these is outlined below. The number of people aged 15-64 years with blindness (presenting visual acuity <3/60 in the better eye) or MSVI (presenting visual acuity of <6/18 to 3/60 in the better eye) (crude prevalence and 95% uncertainty lower and upper intervals data supplied by the GBD Vision Loss Expert Group, data presented and described elsewhere. 88  This represents the proportion of a country´s population that is likely employed. Data were sourced from the World Bank´s World Development Indicator database for 2018 (or for the most recent year available) 277 For people with MSVI or blindness compared to people without vision loss. An estimate of the relative reduction in employment for people with vision impairment was identified through a literature search. We sought studies or reports from any country published since the year 2000 that reported the employment status and/or employment gap in people with vision impairment. We identified 11 published studies 144, 152, 157, 159, 162, 168, 222, 226, 259, [278] [279] [280] [281] [282] [283] [284] that provided employment gap data for 15 countries or regions which we categorised into 8 GBD regions and 3 super region (Supplementary Table 17 ). The employment gap for each region and super region was calculated as the weighted average employment gap (with the total population of each country being the weight) of the countries included in each region or super region that reported data. When estimating productivity losses by region we used the super region average whenever there was no data for a specific region. If there were no data for either region or super region the average of all super region was used. The valuation of the annual production loss for people unemployed due to MSVI or blindness was assumed equal to GDP per capita (model 1) or GNI per capita (model 2). Data were sourced from the World Bank´s World Development Indicator database in 2018 US Dollar PPP for 2018 or the most recent year for which data were available: The weighted average of relative reduction in employment for each region was calculated as a weighted average of relative reduction in employment in each country included in each region, with the total population of each country being the weight. 285 It was calculated as the quotient between: Relative reduction of employment per region = Weighted average of Relative Reduction in employment (RR employment) of the countries included in each region that reported data The weighted average of GNI per capita PPP was calculated in the same way. There was no data for GDP or GNI per capita PPP in Cuba, Korea Dem. People's Republic, Syrian Arab Republic, Djibouti, Somalia and Andorra, therefore these countries were not included in this calculation. The weighted average of employment to population ratio for each region was calculated using the same approach as described previously for weighted GDP per capita PPP adapted as follows:  The aim of this analysis was to quantify the cost-effectiveness of cataract surgery and refractive error treatment globally. Articles were identified from the systematic literature search (2000 onwards) outlined above, whereby the title and abstract (when available) was searched for the terms cataract or refractive error combined with cost-effectiveness or cost utility. The full text of studies that were potentially eligible were assessed against the inclusion and exclusion criteria. References of studies that met the inclusion criteria were reviewed to identify additional relevant studies. We included studies that reported health benefits in Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYS) gained or Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALYS) averted and analysed cost-effectiveness in terms of: • Cataract: cataract surgical procedures in the first eye [such as extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE), manual small incision cataract surgery (MSICS) or phacoemulsification (PHACO)] and • Refractive error: any treatment. We excluded studies that reported health benefits without using QALYs or DALYs. We also excluded studies that reported cost-effectiveness for bilateral cataract surgery, intra-capsular cataract extraction, or inserting an intraocular lens. Cost transformation was undertaken, whereby costs were inflated to 2018 values using a country specific Gross Domestic Product (GDP) deflator 287 and converted to USD purchasing power parities 288 (ppp). When the year of cost data was not available, the year of publication was used as the year from which to inflate costs. Two studies reported global data by region using 2000 USD ppp. In these cases we used a US GDP deflator across all regions to convert 2000 USD ppp to 2018 USD ppp. Two review studies reported country data using 2004 USD and another study presented results for India using 2007 USD. In these cases we also used US GDP deflator across all countries to convert 2004 USD to 2018 USD ppp. Average Cost Effectiveness Ratios (CER) reported in the same study, for the same country or region and for the same type of treatment were grouped together if the CERs were: • for the same region but for different refractive error screening alternatives 289, 290 OR • in the same surgical intervention but for different coverage rates 211 OR • in the same country showing discounted and undiscounted values 291 OR • in the same type of cataract surgery and same discount methods 292 OR • in the same country, same type of cataract surgery and 2 different discount methods. 293 Results were presented separately for refractive error and cataract, with CERs ordered from lowest to highest minimum values. 182 studies were identified in the initial screening and 16 met our inclusion criteria. We excluded 3 reviews because they only reported studies already referenced by other included studies. Therefore, we included 13 studies that provided 124 CERs for cataract surgery and 89 for refractive error. 193, 211, [289] [290] [291] [292] [293] [294] [295] [296] [297] [298] [299] The wide range of CERs shown in Figures 13 and 14 suggests regional variation in resource utilization, costs and patient characteristics and heterogeneity in cost effectiveness study methodology, particularly on the cost side. Studies reported by the same group of authors such as Baltussen et al 211, 289 and Lansingh 292,293 estimated health benefits and used discounting methods in a similar way. Baltussen et al 211, 289 followed WHO-CHOICE guidelines and measured health benefits using DALYs averted and discounted both costs and benefit at a 3% rate for a period of 10 years. Lansingh et al 292, 293 used QALYs to measure health benefits and discounted costs and benefits at 3%: 1) over 12 years 293 ; 2) over 5 years 293 and 3) over the lifespan of patients 292 . Fewer similarities were found across the rest of the studies. Sources of variability include the use of different discounts rates [298] [299] [300] , the use of different health related quality of life measures [297] [298] [299] , the measurement of health benefit in different time periods 291, 293 , and the assumed duration of the health benefits. 193, 292, 294 Studies varied in terms of the cost components included. Some included healthcare costs related to the cataract surgery 296, 298 or refractive error 290 while others included: cost of cataract surgery complications 193, 294 ; costs to the provider and to the programme administration 211, 289 ; costs to the patient and provider 291 ; personal social service costs in addition to primary and secondary health care costs 299 . Costs reported by the two reviews 292, 293 included in this analysis were also heterogeneous despite attempts at standardisation. There is always heterogeneity when comparing cost-effectiveness studies from different settings due, for example, to different healthcare system organization and prices or due to the adoption of different analytical perspectives. Even within the same setting and for the same intervention the adoption of different methodologies such as different perspectives and different choice of comparators (when reporting incremental cost effectiveness analysis) heterogeneity exists. Therefore, comparisons should always be made with caution.  The aim of this analysis was to summarise the nature and extent of peer-reviewed publishing on the leading causes of vision impairment over the 20 years since Vision 2020 was launched. This will be presented in a forthcoming publication. The sample was constructed by an information specialist on MEDLINE in April 2020 and is shown in Box 1. We included any primary study on an eye related topic, which could include animal studies and basic laboratory studies. We excluded case reports, editorials, comments, and evidence syntheses (e.g. narrative or systematic review). Box 1: Summary of search to construct sample 1 exp eye diseases/ 2 limit 1 to yr=2000 -2019 3 case reports/ 4 2 not 3 5 limit 4 to journal article 6 limit 5 to (meta analysis or "review" or "systematic review" or systematic reviews as topic) 7 5 not 6 The list of MeSH headings and sub-headings under 'explode eye disease' were used to categorise each record to one of the following eight categories: 1) cataract 2) refractive error 3) glaucoma 4) AMD 5) diabetic retinopathy 6) corneal opacity 7) trachoma 8) other. The following criteria were used: 1. If a paper only has MeSH terms for one of the categories, code it to that category; 2. If a paper has MeSH terms from more than one of the categories, it was assigned to the category that has the greater number of terms. E.g. if a paper has 3 trachoma terms and 1 glaucoma term, it was assigned to trachoma; 3. If a paper has equal # of MeSH terms from 2 or more categories, it was assigned to the condition that causes the higher magnitude of blindness (ordered from 1 to 7 above); 4. If a paper has no MeSH terms related to categories 1 to 7 it was coded as 'other'. The location of the study was determined using three approaches. The country of affiliation of the first author was extracted and separately, the name of any country in the abstract was extracted. Where only one of these was available, it was used to assign the location of the study. Where the country of affiliation differed from the country in the abstract, the country in the abstract was used. Where neither of these were available, the place of publication was used (~3% of records). Each country was assigned to the relevant region and super-region using GBD categories. The first name and surname of all authors were extracted and assigned a gender (male/female/unknown) using validated algorithm (gender-api.com). Sub-Saharan Africa is home to 13.5% of the global population, but only 1.7% of eye health related clinical trials have been conducted in this region since 2000. Given the magnitude vision impairment in Sub-Saharan Africa is disproportionately high, the Commission undertook an in-depth review of RCTs conducted in Sub-Saharan Africa over the past 20 years The search was constructed by the Cochrane Eyes and Vision Information Specialist outlined above (Twenty years of eye research) was used for this analysis. An algorithm was created to identify RCTs and studies done in Sub-Saharan Africa within the larger dataset from the title, abstract and MeSH terms. In addition, reference lists of relevant Cochrane reviews were searched, and a wider group of global eye health research experts were contacted to review the list and identify any other potentially relevant studies. The title and abstract of potentially relevant papers were screened. Duplicates, publications that were not RCTs and those not from Sub-Saharan Africa were identified and removed. In total, 123 publications were identified as reporting results of a trial (main trial paper) or associated findings of the trial. For example, bigger projects such as the Partnership for Rapid Elimination of Trachoma (PRET) had multiple secondary reports on trachoma but also other nested studies which looked at the impact of Azithromycin on non-eye health conditions such as malaria, bacterial infections, and growth and nutrition. For this analysis, we excluded these secondary reports, leaving 86 trials across 89 reports (some trials were in several countries, and the study was published separately for each country). The research team undertook data extraction, including: • study and publication characteristics: journal and year of publication, country of trial, registration, funding source, and study period; • main trial methodological characteristics: condition of interest, participants, sample size, trial intervention and primary outcome; • author information: first and surname and affiliations (country, city, institution), position in authorship list (first/last/other). A second member of the research team checked for completeness and quality of extraction. Where possible, gender was allocated based on the author being known to a member of the research team. A validated algorithm was used to assign gender to any remaining names (gender-api.com). Affiliations were categorised as being from the country of study, international, or both. For results reported here, we assigned individuals with both local and international affiliations to one of these based on where they did their undergraduate training. Analysis was conducted using Microsoft Excel. It focused on a) condition of interest by country where the trial was conducted, b) who conducted the trial with respect to number and gender of authors and affiliations (country of study vs international), c) authorship positions for African researcher (men and women). The 86 trials (in 89 reports) were conducted in 16 countries (Map), and more than half (52, 58%) were from four countries: Nigeria (14) , South Africa (14), Ghana (12) or Ethiopia (12), (Figure) . There was a modest increase in the number of trials published between 2000-2009 (35) and 2010-2019 (51) . The trials were usually funded by organisations outside the continent (70, 81%), almost all of which involved large funding organisations in North America and Europe. Commercial institutions contributed funding to 14 trials, only two of which did not involve other funders. Sixteen trials (19%) were conducted through local academic institution support, primarily in South Africa (5), Ghana (4) and Nigeria (4). Region Country  Trachoma  Onchocerciasis  Glaucoma  Cataract  Refractive  error  DR  Other c  Total   Western  Nigeria  1  -5  3  1  -4  14  Ghana a  -7  1  -1  -3  12  Cameroon  -7  -----7  The Gambia b  6  ------6  Niger  3  ------3  Liberia a  -2  -----2  Guinea  1  ------1  Mali  1  ------1  Southern  South Africa  --7  4  --3  14  Eastern  Ethiopia  12  ------12  Kenya - Trachoma was the most frequently studied condition (28, 33%) followed by onchocerciasis (17, 20%) and glaucoma (16, 19%) . While trachoma and onchocerciasis are important conditions in their own right, there has been a relative underinvestment in other conditions and areas of study. Several lessons can be drawn from the NTD research. First, highquality trial evidence has been vital to effectively address these conditions, shaping disease control approaches being deployed in endemic regions, leading to substantial reductions in prevalence of both Neglected Tropical Diseases (NTDs) over the last 20 years. Second, the trials were characterised by extensive collaboration between multiple wellaligned partners, including government NTD programmes. Third, the research community was relatively well-coordinated in identifying key questions and minimising unnecessary duplication. 301 Fourth, major funders have been very engaged in supporting the research needed to develop elimination strategies. The African region faces many eye health challenges, particularly in relation to glaucoma, where early detection and appropriate management can reduce loss of vision. It is a challenge that currently does not have good solutions. There is an urgent need for systematic research to develop contextually relevant approaches to identify and manage glaucoma in Africa. Forthcoming publication: Jacqueline Ramke, Justine H Zhang, Sare Safi, Simon Arunga, William Waldock, Nyawira Mwangi, Helen Burn, Miho Yoshizaki, Matthew J Burton On October 25 2019 the list of ophthalmology journals was downloaded from SCImajo, along with the SCImajo rank (https://www.scimagojr.com/). This list contained the name of 121 journals. Of these, three were duplicates of the same journal (listed using a previous name), four were unable to be located by google search (2 Russian journals, 2 Chinese), one had a website that could not be translated (Eastern European) and one had no editor information. We therefore report results for 112 journals. Data were extracted from websites between October 25 2019 and January 31 2020. One of the authorship team visited the website of each journal, and extracted the following data: • Journal: name, publisher, region of focus (global/HIC/LMIC/not specified), • Editorships: category (e.g. editor-in-chief, section editor, associate editor, editorial board member), name, affiliation (institution, city, country), availability of photo (yes/no), where a photo was available, whether the editor appeared to be male or female. All positions with current decisive functions regarding manuscript acceptance were extracted. Advisory board members were included, but not editor emeritus or editorial staff members (e.g. managing editor, editorial assistant, copy editor, technical editor, statistical consultant). When an editor had more than one affiliation listed, the second was extracted only if it was in a different country to the first affiliation. If the institutional country was not explicitly listed, Google Maps was used to identify the location of the institutional affiliation of the editorship. When an editor was listed with only initials rather than a first name, an internet search was undertaken using the available information (such as the affiliation) to identify the first name where available. We did not de-duplicate names across journals, so if an individual sat on more than one editorial board, they were counted for each position held. We categorised editorships into two groups: • Editor-in-chiefcaptures editorships whose raw titles imply a leadership element, such as editor-in-chief and chief editor; • Editor comprises raw titles such as editor, associate editor, section editor, member of editorial board, editorial committee, advisory board. The list of editor names was assigned a gender by using the validated Gender-API software (https://gender-api.com/). For any names unable to be matched, the data collected from photographs (where available) was used to assign gender. The editorships unable to be matched that did not have a photograph were removed from the analysis.  Forthcoming publication. To identify the grand challenges in global eye health we undertook a three-round modified Delphi process. We wanted to reach people not always included in these processes, so in addition to issuing personal invitations to stakeholders known to Commissioners, we issued an invitation to nominate challenges in the Community Eye Health Journal (which has a broad readership in African countries and India) and through newsletters of ICO and WCO organisations (e.g. ARVO, IAPB, Royal College of Ophthalmology). In Round 1 we received responses from people across all GBD superregions and a broad range of disciplines relevant to global eye health (including clinicians, decision-makers, researchers, advocates, program implementers, educators and people with lived experience of vision loss and eye problems). Ultimately 336 people completed all three Rounds. In Round 1 participants were asked one question: 'What are the grand challenges in Global Eye Health?' Where a grand challenge was defined as a specific barrier that, if removed, would help to solve an important health problem. If successfully implemented, the intervention(s) to address this grand challenge would have a high likelihood of feasibility for scaling up and impact. Participants could nominate up to 5 challenges. All responses were thematically analysed and an iterative process undertaken to develop a list of 85 unique challenges to present in Round 2, where participants chose and ranked their 20 priority challenges. The 40 highest ranked challenges from Round 2 were presented in Round 3 and participants ranked each challenge against four criteria (disease burden reduction, inequality reduction, immediacy of impact and feasibility) on a four-point scale. The final list of grand challenges includes the 16 highest ranked challenges from Round 2 (which identified participants' overall priorities) and the average score of all criteria in Round 3. Section 6: Beyond 2020 -Delivering high-quality universal eye care Dimensions for countries to consider when moving towards Universal Health Coverage. Source: WHO. 302 The main clinical cadres, their scope of work, resource requirement and integration within the health system. Terminology varies between countries and regions. Doctors who have gone through extensive higher training in ophthalmology, including the diagnosis and advanced management of eye disease and ophthalmic surgery. Usually based in secondary or tertiary eye units, where most eye surgery is performed. Require a large array of complex diagnostic and treatment equipment to perform role. Optometrist Have typically undergone four years of training in refraction and carrying out comprehensive eye examination. Provide refractive services and opportunistic screening for non-refractive causes of poor vision. They can work independently practice or work in eye hospitals as part of the team. Cataract surgeon Several countries with a shortage of ophthalmologists have trained experienced allied ophthalmic personnel to perform some ophthalmic surgical procedures. They tend to be based in secondary eye units and require diagnostic and treatment equipment to perform role. Ideally, they work under the supportive supervision of an ophthalmologist. Orthoptist Have typically undergone three years of training in ocular movement assessment, refraction, visual field assessment and common eye conditions in children. They have particular expertise in assessing vision in children, and in managing strabismus refractive error and amblyopia in children. They usually work in eye hospitals as part of the team. Refractionist Trained in assessing common refractive errors. They often work in optical shops or as part of an eye care team in an eye hospital. Dispensing opticians Trained to dispense spectacles from a prescription, including frame fitting and lens cutting and centration Dispensing opticians Trained to dispense spectacles from a prescription, including frame fitting and lens cutting and centration Ophthalmic nurse Have typically undergone specialised training in ophthalmic nursing on a background of a general nursing qualification. They have particular expertise in the nursing care (out-patient, in-patient and / or operating theatre) of eye patients. Some are trained in the diagnosis and management of common eye conditions. They usually work in eye hospitals as part of the team. In some settings they perform a limited set of surgical procedures. In order to contribute to the global conversation around the selection of suitable indicators, beyond the eCSC and eREC highlighted by WHO, the Commission initiated a two round indicators prioritisation project. The panel consisted of 72 eye health experts from 39 countries, with good representation from all GBD Super Regions (85% representing LMICs) and 40% female. The panel worked to develop a proposed menu of indicators (core and extended) to monitor eye health and eye health services at the national level, to support governments in their progress towards achieving UHC. In Round 1, the panel scored potential indicators according to priority for their setting. In Round 2, indicators above the median Round 1 priority score were scored on four further criteria: feasibility, actionability, repeatability and international comparability. Core indicators were defined as those that all countries could ideally report for use at national and global levels. Supplementary Table 27 . These represent key concepts across the results chain, with seven selected as core indicators for monitoring progress towards UHC (Commission Report Table  6 ). Sub-indicators, drawn from the prioritisation process, were included where additional articulation of key concepts was required. Input (governance, finance, infrastructure, supply chain, information), output (access, quality and safety), outcome (coverage) and impact (improved outcomes) domains were all represented in the final selection. An equity statement accompanies the menu and all indicators should be disaggregated by key equity dimensions. We anticipate that this menu and future metadata descriptions could be used to inform monitoring and evaluation frameworks for governments and eye health programmes. In addition, existing gaps in indicator availability need to be addressed, for example, around conditions such as glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy. Indicator metadata should also be developed collaboratively to describe preferred methods of data collection, reporting and usage. We aimed to answer two questions: 1. What is the nature, extent and global distribution of data on the coverage and effectiveness of cataract services? 2. What is the nature, extent and global distribution of data on financial protection in relation to cataract services? 2000s  2010s  2000s  2010s  2000s  2010s  2000s  2010s  2000s  2010s  2000s  2010s  2000s  2010s  Andean Latin America  6  6  0  5  0  4  0  2  0  0  0  4  0  5  32  Australasia  1  7  1  2  2  1  0  1  0  0  1  3  0  1  20  Caribbean  5 Africa and Middle East  1  26  4  5  3  5  0  2  0  0  4  9  0  2  61  Oceania  0  9  2  1  2  1  0  0  1  0  1  1  1  0  19  South Asia  0  12  25  17  27  15  0  4  0  1  22  17  11  6  157  Southeast Asia  0  32  18  22  17  21  0  4  0  1  17  23  2  6  163  Southern Latin America  7  8  2  3  2  2  0  3  0  0  2  2  0  7  38  Southern Sub-Saharan Africa  0  9  3  1  2  1  0  0  0  0  1  2  0  0  19  Tropical Latin America  5  4  2  2  3  2  0  0  1  0  3  2  1  1  26  Western Europe  5  49  0  0  1  3  0  0  0  0  3  4  0  0  65  Western Sub-Saharan Africa  2  32  12  8  8  7  0  3  0  0  9  8  0  3  92   Global  54  327  99  104  99  98  0  28  4  2  91  112  Forthcoming comment: We can improve cataract surgery outcomes by strengthening integration with refractive error services We identified all studies from the scoping review outlined on pp 80-83 that reported cataract surgical outcome (CSO) using presenting visual acuity as well as pinhole visual acuity (a proxy for best-corrected visual acuity with spectacles or contact-lenses). Across 112 studies, the median 'good CSO' of 6/18 or better with presenting visual acuity was 58% and with pinhole visual acuity was 70%, a 21% relative improvement. Across 110 studies, the median 'poor CSO' of worse than 6/60 was 21% with presenting visual acuity and 17% with pinhole visual acuity, a 19% relative improvement. Thus, if refractive error services were better integrated with cataract services, poor outcomes could be reduced by 20% and good outcomes could be increased by 20%. Supporting information for: Commission Report Figure 21 : Effective Cataract Surgical Coverage, by GBD Super Region Commission Report Figure 22 : CSC and eCSC in Vietnam. Publication pending. The RAAB Repository (www.raabdata.info) curates information relating to surveys conducted from 1995 up to 2019. Where Principal Investigators have given permission for their anonymous and unlinked raw survey data to be made open access and hosted publicly, the Repository provides a link to download that data. We downloaded each available data set and its associated population age-sex structure information. We calculated adjusted and gender-disaggregated CSC and eCSC estimates per survey using the equations in the box below. Where a country had only one survey, we included the estimate from that survey in the summary. Where two or more surveys had been conducted in a country, the most recent estimate was included in the summary unless a nationally representative survey had been conducted less than 5 years previous to a sub-national survey, in which case the national estimate was used. Where multiple sub-national surveys had been conducted within a two-year period, we used the median estimate from the series. eCSC estimates used for each country were taken from national or subnational sampling areas depending on availability. Cataract surgical coverage (CSC) is defined as the number of people in a defined population with operated cataract as a proportion of those having operable plus operated cataract (i.e. pinhole visual acuity worse than 6/60). where x = individuals with unilateral pseudo/aphakia (i.e. operated cataract) and operable cataract in the other eye; y = individuals with bilateral pseudo/aphakia, regardless of visual acuity; z = individuals with bilateral operable cataract. Effective cataract surgical coverage (eCSC) measures the number of people in a defined population with operated cataract and a good outcome (i.e. presenting vision 6/18 or better) as a proportion of those having operable plus operated cataract. As for CSC, eCSC is calculated using the cut-off for operable cataract of worse than 6/60 pinhole visual acuity. where a = individuals with unilateral pseudo/aphakia achieving presenting visual acuity of 6/18 or better in the operated eye and operable cataract in the other eye; b = individuals with bilateral pseudo/aphakia achieving presenting visual acuity of 6/18 or better in at least one eye; x, y and z as above for CSC. To further summarise this information, we calculated gender-disaggregated median and interquartile range (IQR) eCSC estimates for each Global Burden of Disease super region and presented them as box and whisker plots (Commission Report Figure 21 ). To investigate temporal trends in CSC and eCSC we compared the median values from a three-survey series conducted at distinct points in time in Vietnam (Figure 22a in main text). Using the same Vietnam data, we demonstrated the effect of changing the visual acuity thresholds for 'operable cataract' and a 'good' outcome on the coverage level achieved (Figure 22b in main text). Data from population-based surveys of people ≥40 years, disaggregated by gender, urban or rural location and marital status. (A) and (B) disaggregated eCSC values (95% CI) for different population sub-groups. The eCSC target of 60% reflects 80% coverage with 80% good outcomes. There were no urban not-married men with cataract blindness in Sri Lanka. Adapted from Ramke et al. 313 Building the quality of eye care Interventions to improve quality of cataract services: a global scoping review Objective: We aimed to answer the following three questions: 1. What interventions to improve quality of cataract services have been described in the published literature? 2. Which element(s) of quality did the interventions address? 3. Where was the evidence generated (high-vs middle-vs low-income settings, geographic region)? Search date: 17 November 2019 Search databases: MEDLINE, Embase and Global Health Key definitions: Cataract services: the range of activities on the pathway from detecting people with operable cataract, to these people undergoing surgery and receiving post-operative care. Quality: WHO's seven elements of quality-effectiveness, efficiency, equity, integration, people-centredness, safety and timeliness-to which we added planetary health. Key inclusion/ exclusion criteria: Included: • primary research studies of any design from any country that reported a quality-relevant outcome for primary age-related cataract following an intervention related to quality of cataract services. Systematic reviews were also included if meta-analysis was conducted for a quality-relevant outcome. • studies where an intervention was compared against an alternative (e.g. intervention vs. no intervention / current practice vs. new intervention / before vs. after implementation). Excluded: • studies that assessed specific surgical techniques (e.g. phacoemulsification vs. manual small incision surgery, site of anaesthesia) and/or specific products and medications used during and around the time of surgery • studies focussed exclusively on cataract services for children ( • Immediate sequential reduced provider and patient cost (efficiency) and achieved quicker and sustained improvement in QoL and visual function (people-centredness) • Immediate sequential did not compromise effectiveness or safety-similar postoperative VA and complication rates compared to DSBCS Changes to service delivery model • Single-function cataract treatment centre reduced cost per patient (efficiency) and improved outcomes (effectiveness) • Standardised cataract surgery contract that embedded quality measures increased the volume of surgery and proportion of day-surgeries (efficiency) Selective pre-operative medical evaluation • Conducting preoperative medical evaluation only for those with high risk of adverse medical events reduced cost and time for provider, reduced cancellation rates (efficiency) and reduced the number of visits required (people-centredness) while maintaining safety (adverse medical events) and postoperative VA (effectiveness) Changes to reimbursement • In Thailand, introduction of a centrally reimbursed fee schedule policy increased the volume of cataract surgery and the cataract surgical rate. • Regulated competition introduced in Netherlands increased the volume and safety of cataract surgery Postoperative review at 2 weeks • Omitting Day 1 postoperative review improved efficiency, and did not compromise effectiveness or safety Change management programmes • Change management (e.g. plan-do-study-act) involving a multidisciplinary team improved efficiency, reduced costs and complications (safety). • Nurse-led sedation improved access to cataract surgery (efficiency) without compromising safety Capacity building • Non-governmental or high-performing hospitals acting as mentor to underperforming hospitals improved in capacity in underperforming hospitals (efficiency). Pre-operative education • Using multimedia presentations (e.g. video, computer-based) or visual aids (e.g. 3D model of eye) improved patients' knowledge about cataract surgery compared to verbal information only; also reduced time needed for informed consent (efficiency) and reduced anxiety among patients (people-centredness). Pain / anxiety management • Music before and during the operation reduced the pain experience and increased satisfaction but showed mixed results for anxiety level. • Patients who received pre-operative psychological care were more cooperative and satisfied with surgery and required less IV sedation. Omitting the traditional eye patch • Omitting the traditional eye patch (no patch, transparent shield only or therapeutic bandage contact lens) provided instant vision for operated eye (peoplecentredness), without compromising safety (no difference in incidence of intraocular pressure and flare, corneal condition). • Continuing nursing care at home for a year following discharge of cataract surgery effectively addressed patients' other physical health needs (e.g. diabetes, blood pressure) as well as achieved better visual acuity (effectiveness) in China. Second eye surgery • Second-eye surgery improved clinical vision (e.g. VA, contrast sensitivity), functional vision (e.g. reading speed, facial recognition) and quality of life (peoplecentredness) compared to surgery for one eye alone in patients with bilateral cataract. Biometry • Using biometry to inform intraocular lens (IOL) power, rather than using the standard IOL for all patients, improved refractive outcome of cataract patients (effectiveness) in LMIC setting. • Monitoring of surgical outcomes to each surgeon improved visual outcomes (effectiveness) and reduced complication rates (safety) in LMIC setting. • Risk stratification based on potential intraoperative complications risk and matching of surgeon based on their experience improved overall visual outcomes (effectiveness) and reduced complication rates (safety), hence providing safer system for surgeon training. Surgeon advice on future need of spectacle use • Surgeon advice on future need of spectacle use at the time of surgery improved best corrected visual acuity (effectiveness), patient satisfaction and vision related activity limitation (people-centredness). Forthcoming publication: J Buchan, C Thiel, A Steyn, J Somner, R Venkatesh, M Burton, J Ramke. Addressing the environmental sustainability of eye health delivery: a scoping review. Addressing the environmental sustainability of eye health delivery: a scoping review Objective: We aimed to answer two questions: 1. What is the nature and extent of the literature describing the environmental costs of delivering eye care services, and the interventions to diminish those environmental costs? 2. What breadth of engagement is there with this issue in terms of sources of evidence? What environmental sustainability themes are not being reported upon? Search date: 12 March 2020 Search databases: MEDLINE, Embase and Global Health Key inclusion/ exclusion criteria: Included: • Observational studies of the environmental impact of eye health care provision (quantified as carbon dioxide equivalent or other measure of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission, air or water toxins or other pollutants) • Interventional studies investigating strategies to diminish the environmental impact of eye health care provision • Systematic literature reviews or modelling exercises that explore either negative environmental impact of eye health care or interventions to mitigate environmental impact of health care which report eye care specifics Excluded: • Studies of waste (eg wasting water in surgical scrub or wasting drugs) which do not directly or indirectly evaluate the environmental impact of the waste • Studies that increase productivity for the same resource utilisation but do not quantify the environmental costs per unit activity • Editorials or other articles which do not report any primary data Number of included studies: 8 Protocol registration: Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/cn5wp/) It is now accepted that climate change is happening and that it represents the greatest long-term threat to global population health in the 21 st Century. 314 Human activity, primarily mediated through greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from the world's larger economies, is the major driver. 315 The impact is most acute in LMICs. Global healthcare is estimated to contribute approximately 5% of all GHG emissions. 316, 317 Eye care is a high-volume service in many countries, with large number of consultations and procedures annually. For example, in the UK ophthalmology is now the highest volume speciality, accounting for 8.14% of hospital outpatient visits nationally in 2018/19. 318 Therefore, eye care is already a significant contributor to health care emissions. With an ageing global population increasingly requiring eye care interventions, it is essential we promote sustainable practice and deconstruct unsustainable systems now. To date, the environmental impact of eye care services has received little attention; the climate emergency places responsibility on all sectors to carefully consider their individual contributions to addressing it. To examine the extent and nature of the potential environmental impact of eye health services, a scoping literature review was undertaken as part of the Commission. A summary is provided in the supplementary annex and the full results are forthcoming in a separate publication. There is a profound paucity of evidence; only eight reports met the inclusion criteria. All were published after 2009, showing this to be a new field of study. Most reported carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) as an outcome measure, permitting limited comparisons between studies, although methodologies were diverse. Calculation of CO2e for the separate components of a service, such as buildings, travel and procurement, were considered impracticable, however using publicly available standard carbon cost frameworks, carbon footprints can be calculated in a standardised way. 319 A detailed carbon footprint of phacoemulsification cataract surgery has been estimated for individual centres in the UK and India. 320, 321 For the same procedure, considering only equivalent components, the CO2e were 132.9kg CO2e in the UK and 5.9kg CO2e in India. The reasons why a single phacoemulsification cataract operation in the UK produces twenty times more CO2e than the same procedure, delivered safely and to a very high standard of clinical effectiveness in India, need teasing out. 322, 323 Excluding transport, the major component comes from procurement of medical supplies (Figure) . Even at current activity levels, if Indian cataract services adopted UK cataract surgical practices, this would generate an additional 1.16 megatonnes of CO2e annually, requiring 30 million new tree seedlings growing for 10 years to sequester this amount of carbon. It is clear from just these two studies that there can be large variations in the GHG emissions associated with the same surgical intervention. To move this field forward, tools are being developed to routinely measure environmental costs associated with cataract surgery as a mark of quality, alongside the other measures of high-quality services. Convenient life cycle assessment tools have been developed to facilitate evaluation of the carbon footprint of cataract surgery, available as the Eyefficiency App for use on smartphones. 324 The initial focus on cataract in the literature is understandable, however, this now needs to be broadened to examine many other aspects of practice. The frequent pattern in HICs of using disposable instruments and single-use eye drops in clinical settings add substantially to the carbon footprint. 325, 326 This is an approach that is beginning to be questioned on environmental grounds. 320 The main barrier to HIC services adopting more sustainable practices are the regulatory constraints that enforce reduction of perceived clinical risks to zero, but at a financial and environmental price. 325 New ways of ensuring individual patient safety will need to emerge that also protect the environment, which is key to the health of all people. Every aspect of practice can be examined and opportunities to reduce consumption identified. There is an opportunity for HICs to learn much from highly efficient units in LMICs. This process would also benefit from close collaboration between service providers and industry. Changing practice, and the policy environment that regulates this, will need evidence. Ultimately, both HICs and LMICs will need to function within the boundaries imposed by finite planetary resources. Healthcare providers, in close partnership with pharmaceutical and manufacturing industries, need to migrate to more sustainable delivery. Therefore, as we seek to develop services to deliver eye health within UHC, to cover more conditions and reach more people, expansion must be at least matched by contraction of the environmental resource utilisation per case and a marked increase in efficiency.  Supporting information for Commission Figure 23 : Strategies to improve access to eye care for Indigenous and other non-dominant ethnic groups. This figure draws on the results of two separate scoping reviews. The protocols are published, the publications are forthcoming, and a methods summary is provided below.  Title: Gender and eye health: an overview of systematic reviews Objective / Review question: What is the nature and extent of the evidence in published systematic reviews on: 1. gender inequality in eye health (e.g. from prevalence surveys); and 2. interventions to reduce gender inequality. Search date: 24 July 2019; updated 24 September 2020 Search databases: MEDLINE, Embase and Global Health Definitions: Systematic review: a scientific investigation that focuses on a specific question and uses explicit, pre-specified scientific methods to identify, select, assess, and summarize similar but separate studies. Key inclusion/ exclusion criteria: Included: • published systematic reviews that report any of the following outcomes: o prevalence of eye problems in women and men (or female/male children) separately (e.g. prevalence of visual impairment, barriers to uptake of services); or o an estimate of the relative prevalence of eye problems in women and men (e.g. prevalence ratio or odds ratio of likelihood of blindness in women compared to men); or o the uptake of eye health interventions in women and men separately (e.g. uptake of cataract surgery, spectacle compliance). • Any population group; no time limit and no language limits. 8. Target screening to vulnerable/at risk groups e.g. nursing homes, the homeless, incarcerated, refugees, people with disability, those aged 65+, newborns 9. Improve efficiency of public outpatient clinics / reduce waiting times / minimise the number of visits required 10. Include screening in established community-based activities such as trachoma trichiasis, NCD screening, elderly program, newborn screening, or traditional health programs Highest ranked strategies to improve access to cataract surgery 1. Decentralize services so services are closer to people -establish permanent surgical capacity at district/subdistrict level and deploy cataract surgeons with appropriate infrastructure 2. Strengthen the link between screening, referral to surgery and follow-up (create and comply with protocols) 3. Reduce or eliminate out of pocket costs for surgery and post-operative care (e.g. have a subsidised option, philanthropy, insurance) 4. Provide universal health insurance that covers cataract surgery and post-operative care 5. Deliver consistently good quality surgical outcomes to maximise uptake (monitor outcomes with audit and feedback and improve where necessary) 6. Improve efficiency to increase surgical output and reduce waiting time & unit cost e.g. day surgery, streamline referral process to minimise number of appointments needed, specific cataract pathway/list, adequate workforce to meet population need, monitor productivity and link it to payment, twin-table theatres 7. Conduct regular outreach surgery away from the main eye department, linked to screening program 8. Design services and funding mechanisms that give priority to disadvantaged groups e.g. target services to specific groups such as women in rural areas 9. Raise awareness (e..g. radio, someone who previously had surgery, women's groups) -health education & promotion -eye problems and benefits of timely surgery 10. Train more surgeons in contextually relevant surgical techniques (e.g. MSICs) and deploy / incentivize them to work in rural areas / with disadvantaged populations Lancet Global Health Commission on Global Eye Health: Beyond 2020 -Supplementary Appendix 1 97 Global results of a modified Delphi process with 183 participants. Size of the word reflects how often it was selected. Priority groups: the combination of the groups which experience the most difficulty and the groups which represent the largest number of people unable to access cataract services. This panel draws on two separate analyses. One has been published and one is forthcoming. Action is clearly needed to increase the diversity of leadership in these organisations. Women were one-third or fewer of all board members or chairpersons across each of these organisations, with ICO faring better than WCO and IAPB (supplementary annex). There was large regional variation, particularly in chairpersons; women were infrequently chairpersons of IAPB member organisations outside of high-income countries. The intersection of gender and ethnic minority status was explored for the organisations based in North America, Western Europe and Australasia, where ethnic minorities are 15-40% of national populations. Across all three membership organisations, white men held more than half of all positions, outnumbering the combination of white women and ethnic-minority women and men. 328 This contrast was particularly poor in IAPB member organisations, where white men were 72% of all chairpersons, while ethnic minority women held 4% of chair positions. Evidence from other fields suggests that global eye health organisations that place women, and people from ethnic minority and LMIC backgrounds in leadership positions are likely better placed to respond to the unequal distribution of eye health and care between and within countries. 329 This was reinforced in the World Report on Vision, which highlighted the need for inclusive and participatory leadership to deliver Universal Health Coverage for eye health. 9 To realise inclusive leadership, structural change is required to remove the individual and systemic biases that preclude true inclusion of women, particularly women who have other devalued intersectional identities (e.g. ethnic minority). 330 It is critical that white men in high income countries take an active, visible, and positive role as leaders and advocates for change; the work required should not primarily fall to women and other underrepresented groups. 329 The global eye health sector must establish diversity and inclusion goals and identify the most promising strategies to enable change. This analysis provides a baseline to assess our progress.  Supporting material for: In order to analyse the factors shaping global political prioritisation for eye health, we undertook archival research on the history of eye health prioritisation, reviewing documentation from the WHO, IAPB, non-governmental organisations and other actors in the eye care sector. We reviewed published reports and articles on progress-to-date and lessons learned in the sector. We also consulted minutes of meetings (such as IAPB Board Meetings and Council of Members) of individuals involved in the establishment of initiatives such as 'Vision 2020: the Right to Sight' and the 'Alliance for the Global Elimination of Trachoma by 2020'. The minutes were reviewed to capture the perspectives of eye care actors on the state of political prioritisation for global eye health. We also undertook a scoping exercise to determine global commitments to eye health over the last 20 years. We reviewed national data as submitted by countries reporting on their progress against the Global Action Plan, noting the prevalence of national eye health coordinators, prevention of blindness committees and national eye health plans as indicators in order to evaluate resources committed and prioritisation given by different countries. Finally, we consulted with key individuals in the eye care sector, including the WHO, and incorporated their feedback on the analysis. One limitation of the study was the ability to analyse and obtain national level data and actor input. The Global Action Plan data were incomplete such that a full global picture cannot be discerned. Another limitation was that the indicators measured do not conclusively or necessarily connote national commitment to eye health. We would recommend further research on the national prioritisation and integration of eye health, particularly compared to other health and development initiatives. Finally, expanding the consultative process with the sector, such as through interviews, would supplement our assessment and findings. 
